A STUDY OF SHORT-TERM REMEMBERING IN THE POSSUM: USING A DELAYED-MATCHING-TO-SAMPLE PROCEDURE.

A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Social Science at the University of Waikato by BETHANY JANE HARDAKER

University of Waikato 2006

ii. Abstract
In Experiment one 7 Brushtail possums were trained, using food, to perform a Delayed-Matching-To-Sample procedure using still and flickering light stimuli, over a 0, 1 and 2 second delay. A criterion of 80 percent correct for 5 consecutive days was set for the requirement to probe test. Probe session delays were 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 8 seconds. Performance was analysed using the measure of discrimination log d. Log d = 1 at the possums training delay and dropped back to log d = 0 at the longer inexperienced delays. The possums performance at this task was only adequate, so in case the stimuli were causing discrimination difficulties they were changed for the following experiment to horizontal and vertical light stimuli. Experiment two used the horizontal and vertical light stimuli to further test DMTS in possums. The possum's responding stayed at 50 percent correct, or chance, so the task was changed to a Simultaneous-Choice procedure. However, this did not have any effect on improving their results with responding accuracy remaining at 50 percent correct. Experiment three involved a conditional discrimination procedure, which was implemented to find out whether the possums could in fact discriminate between a horizontal and vertical light. All the possums in this experiment reached 80 percent correct overall and at responding to either a horizontal or vertical light. These results are enough to conclude that it was not the stimuli used in the previous two experiments which that had been causing the difficulties but the task itself. It is not known exactly why the possums were so unsuccessful in performing a DMTS or MTS task. More research into DMTS in possums in greatly needed and would offer a better understanding of the results of this study.

iii.

Acknowledgements
I am forever grateful for the sound advice and consistent support provided to me by my supervisors Dr. W. Temple and Dr. C. Sumpter. Thank-you for your dedication when times where rough. I owe a huge thank-you to Jenny Chandler for all the technical support, the laughs and the occasional tears but above all the endless encouragement. Also many thanks to all those who helped me run my daily sessions or took part in my Experiment in any way. It was appreciated. Finally, thank-you to everyone else who supported me while writing this Thesis; my Friends, my Partner Angelo and my loving Family. I could not have done it without you.

iv.

Contents

ASTRACT.................................................................................................ii ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.......................................................................iii CONTENTS..............................................................................................iv LIST OF FIGURES....................................................................................v INTRODUCTION......................................................................................1 EXPERIMENT ONE...............................................................................17 METHOD................................................................................................17 RESULTS................................................................................................25 DISCUSSION..........................................................................................38 EXPERIMENT TWO...............................................................................41 METHOD.................................................................................................43 RESULTS................................................................................................47 DISCUSSION..........................................................................................48 EXPERIMENT THREE...........................................................................52 METHOD................................................................................................53 RESULTS................................................................................................55 DISCUSSION..........................................................................................58 GENERAL DISCUSSION.......................................................................59 REFERENCES.........................................................................................60 APPENDIX..............................................................................................65

v. List of figures
Page Figure 1. Figure 2. Figure 3. Figure 4. Figure 5. Figure 6. Figure 7. Figure 8. The signal detection matrix...........................................................2 The response panel.......................................................................19 All possum's percent correct at a zero second training delay...............26 Percent correct at a one and two second training delay.......................31 log d at a zero, one and two second delay.....................................35 log c at a zero, one and two second delay....................................37 The response panel modified for Experiment two...........................44 Percent correct Overall and on Horizontal and Vertical trials at a zero second training delay and on a Simultaneous-Choice procedure..........48 Figure 9. Percent correct overall and on horizontal and vertical trials, on a horizontal versus vertical conditional discrimination procedure.............................56

The delayed matching-to-sample (DMTS) procedure, first described by Blough (1959), is one of the most frequently used methods for studying remembering over short delays. Short-term remembering has been researched using the DMTS procedure in an array of animals, such as pigeons (e.g. Blough, 1959, White & Cooney, 1996), hens (e.g. Weavers, Foster, & Temple, 1998), dolphins (e.g. Herman, 1975), monkeys (e.g. D'Amato, 1971), and rats (e.g. Iversen, 1993). Under a DMTS procedure the subject is initially presented with a sample stimulus (e.g., a red or green centre key), which is present either until the animal responds to it a fixed number of times, or for a fixed amount of time. Then, after a delay interval, two comparison stimuli (e.g., red and green side keys) are presented. The side each coloured light is presented on varies depending on the trial. It is the animal's task to respond to the comparison stimulus that matches the sample stimulus, and correct responses are occasionally reinforced (according to a specified schedule of reinforcement) with food. There is then an inter-trial interval (ITI) before a new trial begins. The length of the delay interval can vary within or between a set of trials. Typical DMTS results show that an animal's accuracy at choosing the comparison stimulus that matches the sample stimulus (usually the percentage of correct responses) decreases, as the delay to the comparison stimuli increases (D'Amato, 1971; White, 1991). DMTS results can be analysed by considering a DMTS procedure as similar to a signal detection procedure (e.g., McCarthy & Davison, 1980). A stimulus can either be present or absent in a signal detection trial, and the subject can either report its presence or absence. Thus, four alternative outcomes are possible: (W) a hit, when the stimulus is present and reported as such; (X) a false rejection,

when the stimulus is present but reported as absent; (Y) a false alarm, when the stimulus is absent but reported as present; and (Z) a correct rejection, when the stimulus is absent and reported as such. This gives four possible outcomes which are displayed in Figure 1.

Response Stimulus Present Yes Hit W Absent False Alarm Y No False Rejection X Correct Rejection Z

Figure 1. The signal-detection matrix. Davison and Tustin (1978) suggested that signal detection procedures can be viewed as two separate stimulus situations. One situation occurs when the stimulus is present and reinforcement is delivered for responses signifying its presence. The other occurs when there is no stimulus present and reinforcement is delivered for responses reporting its absence. DMTS procedures can be viewed in a similar way. Under a DMTS procedure there are also two concurrently available behaviours associated with each stimulus trial, with reinforcement occasionally provided for correct responses and no reinforcement provided for incorrect responses (Davison & Tustin, 1978). Since DMTS trials can also be seen as concurrently available

schedules, the results of DMTS studies can be analysed using Baum's (1974) Generalised Matching Law (GML). This is an equation used to describe and predict quantitatively an animal's behaviour in choice (e.g., concurrent) situations. The GML is an extended version of Hernstein's (1961) strict matching law. Hernstein (1961) reported that behaviour under concurrent schedules of reinforcement conforms to strict matching, where the ratio of the number of responses to each stimulus is equal to the ratio of reinforcers obtained on each alternative. Since Hernstein's (1961) paper, however, studies on concurrent-schedule performance have shown that deviations from strict matching are frequent (Baum, 1974). For this reason, Baum (1974) extended the matching law to accommodate occasions where the distribution of behaviour between concurrent schedules does not match the proportion of reinforcement provided on each. Baum's (1974) extension of the matching law, known as the generalised matching law (GML) is expressed mathematically as:

log (B1/B2) = a log (R1/R2) + log c

(1),

where B1 and B2 represent the behaviour (e.g. responses and times) allocated to each of the two alternatives, R1 and R2 correspond to the number of reinforcers obtained on Alternatives 1 and 2, a is the sensitivity of behaviour to changes in the reinforcement-rate ratio, and log c represents any consistent bias for one alternative over another, irrespective of the reinforcement rates provided.

When a is less than 1.00 under matching is said to occur, with the result being that more behaviour than would be predicted by strict matching is allocated to the alternative providing the leaner rate of reinforcement (Baum, 1974; 1979). When under matching is present the animal's behaviour is said to be less sensitive to reinforcement-rate differences than would be predicted by strict matching. When a is greater than 1.00, overmatching is said to have occurred (Baum, 1979). This occurs when the animal has allocated more behaviour to the alternative providing the greater amount of reinforcement than would be predicted by strict matching. Thus, the animal's behaviour is said to be more sensitive to reinforcement-rate differences than would be predicted by strict matching. When all is equal between the schedules other than the rate of reinforcement, log c is a measure of inherent bias. Inherent bias is said to be due to uncontrolled variables such as features of the manipulanda (e.g., one lever is harder to push than another). While the GML provides a reasonable description of behaviour under concurrent schedules of reinforcement, Davison and Tustin (1978) proposed that the GML be extended for DMTS analysis to include a measure of discriminability, log d. log d is a measure of the discriminability of the stimuli at the time the discriminative behaviour is made (White, 1985), and thus is the bias caused by the presence or absence of the stimulus. When the presence or absence of the sample stimulus is discriminated (e.g., the subject shows bias towards saying `yes' when the stimulus is present, and `no' when it is absent), then total bias consists of any inherent bias and bias from the stimulus' presence or absence. The following two equations account for this.

log (Bw/ Bx) = ar1 log (Rw/Rz) + log c + log d and log (By/Bz) = ar2 log (Rw/Rz) + log c - log d

(2),

(3),

where Bw, Bx, By and Bz are the frequencies of responding on the corresponding four outcomes available in the signal detection matrix. Rw and Rz represent the number of reinforcers gained in outcomes W and Z of the signal detection matrix, ar1 and ar2 are the sensitivity to reinforcement-rate ratios, and log d is the bias caused by the presence or absence of the stimulus (Davison & Tustin, 1978). If there is no discrimination between the presence or absence of a stimulus then log d = 0 (Davison & Tustin, 1978). It is also possible to subtract Equation 3 from Equation 2 if ar1 = ar2, (i.e., if the sensitivity to reinforcement-rate differences are the same for both equations). When Equation 4 is subtracted from Equation 3 then the effects of reinforcer-frequency bias and inherent bias (log c) are removed (Davison & Tustin, 1978). Thus, a point estimate of discriminability that is free from inherent bias and reinforcer effects can be found by using the following equation:

log d = 0.5 log (Bw.Bz/Bx.By)

(4),

The assumption that discriminability is independent of response bias was tested by McCarthy and Davison (1980). No interaction was found between discriminability and response bias, and it was further shown that

discriminability could be varied without affecting sensitivity to reinforcement (McCarthy & Davison, 1980). It is also possible to get point estimates of inherent bias (log c) by removing log d (Davison & McCarthy, 1988). This is done by adding and then rearranging Equations 4 and 5, which leaves the following bias function.

0.5 log (Bw.By/Bx.Bz) = ar log (Rx/Rz) + log c

(5),

The measure on the left of the equation is response bias (relative reinforcer-frequency bias and inherent bias) termed log b (Davison & McCarthy, 1988). When the relative reinforcer-frequency variation is one, inherent bias equals response bias and a point estimate of inherent bias can be found; Equation 6

log c = 0.5 log (Bw.By/Bx.Bz)

(6),

Therefore, by using the GML and signal detection theory both a bias free measure of the subject's performance in discriminating between two stimuli, log d and an estimate of inherent bias, log c, can be derived. The values for log d can range from negative infinity to positive infinity, with larger values indicating higher accuracy in discriminating stimuli. When there is no discrimination between the presence or absence of a stimulus log d is zero. Under a DMTS procedure, this means that the animal is remembering at a level equivalent to chance. Thus, log d can be used to measure differences in

remembering performance at various delays. It is said that a negative exponential function best describes the relationship between the animal's ability to discriminate, log d, and the delay interval (White, 1985; Roberts, 1972). The equation for this being:

log dt = log d0 .exp (-bt)

(7),

where log d0 is a measure of performance at a 0 second delay, and b reflects the rate at which the subject's performance decreases as the delay increases. When log d is plotted as a function of delay there is usually a decrement in performance with each increasing delay (Wixted, 1989). This decrement in performance is said to reflect a failure to remember, and several theories have been proposed to explain why this occurs. Traditionally, the view on short-term remembering was that it is retrospective, which implies that some kind of representation of the sample stimulus is made at the time of presentation, and is maintained throughout the delay period until recall is possible (Honig & Thompson, 1982). This representation could be in the form of a decaying trace, as suggested by Grant and Roberts (1973), or in the form of different mediating behaviours, as suggested by Blough (1959). Trace-decay theory suggests that the repetition of the sample stimulus gradually strengthens the memory trace of the stimulus and as time passes the trace decays (Grant & Roberts, 1973). Two factors are said to determine the probability of choosing the correct stimulus; the strength of the trace, and interference with the trace from a second stimulus (Grant & Roberts, 1973).

When the trace is strong the result is an increased probability that the correct comparison stimulus will be chosen, whereas interference resulting from a second comparison stimulus being presented decreases the probability that the correct comparison stimulus will be chosen (Grant & Roberts, 1973). Two other variables affecting performance are stimulus repetition and the passage of time. Stimulus repetition is said to result in improved performance accuracy, as this strengthens the trace, and the passage of time since exposure to the sample stimulus is said to decrease performance accuracy (Grant & Roberts, 1973; Herman, 1975). Thus, decreases in performance over time (e.g., increasing delay lengths) are attributed to the process of the trace decaying. This trace-decay theory has since been modified to propose that the trace is actively processed or rehearsed over the delay, rather than it passively decaying (Grant, 1981). This modification implies a form of prospective coding, rather than retrospective coding. Here, remembering processes are seen as anticipatory in nature, rather than a recollection, and usually involve the subject coding a behaviour to perform. According to this theory, representation of the initial stimulus is maintained over time by a differential behaviour until the time of choice (Honig, 1978). Blough (1959) found that pigeons would repeat one of two distinctly different forms of behaviour depending on which one of the two sample stimuli were presented (still or flickering lights) until a choice response was available. Blough (1959) termed these mediating behaviours. However, because rehearsal could take the form of nearly any movement, this theory is difficult to examine directly (Honig, 1978).

In addition to the cognitive theories of DMTS performance mentioned above, three temporal theories have also been suggested to be related to DMTS performance. D'Amato (1973) suggested that `temporal discriminations or maps' are formed from the repeated occurrence of stimuli and associated responses. Subjects are said to form a response decision immediately after a sample stimulus has been presented, however data suggests that they increasingly forget this response decision over the delay interval (Honig, 1981). Therefore, as the delay interval gets longer, temporal discriminations become more difficult (D'Amato, 1973). For this reason, forgetting is attributed to the difficulty subjects have in discriminating between the two comparison stimuli on the basis of which was most recently seen as the sample (D'Amato, 1973). Thus, the likelihood of a correct temporal discrimination being made is a function of the temporal space between the presentation of the sample stimulus and the length of the delay interval. In other words, this theory suggests that the decrement in accuracy with increasing delay is a function of time. Further analysis of DMTS data was carried out by White (1985) who proposed the theory of Direct Remembering. White's (1985) hypothesis is similar to D'Amato's (1973) above hypothesis in the way that both see remembering as a discrimination task. However, White (1985) suggests temporal discriminations to be analogous to spatial discriminations. Where D'Amato (1973) attributes a decrease in performance with increasing delays to the increasing difficulty of remembering which stimulus was last seen, White (1985) suggests that this is analogous to an event becoming harder to distinguish with increasing spatial distance. Thus, it is proposed that

stimulus control is weakened if stimuli are moved to increasingly physical distances (or as temporal distance increases). Inherent in White's (1991) direct remembering theory is the assumption that remembering is affected by its consequences. This means that if the consequences of remembering change at different delays so should performance. For this reason, remembering performance after one post-sample stimulus delay should be independent of the consequences affecting performance at another (White, 1985; White& Cooney, 1996). So, even though the sample stimuli are physically the same, the addition of time makes each delay distinctively different, thus remembering at one delay is independent of remembering at other delays (White & Cooney, 1996). For this reason it is possible to manipulate performance at one delay without affecting performance at another, by changing the contingencies in place at that one delay. Thus, direct remembering theory predicts that in a DMTS task a standard decay curve will be found when the contingencies are the same for each delay (White, 1991). If however, the contingencies in place for one delay are altered, performance at that delay will change but performance at the other delays should not be affected, as the consequences for responding have not been changed. Apart from the direct remembering theory, the other theories of short-term remembering mentioned in this review predict that at different delays in a DMTS task, contingencies cannot be manipulated to show independent performance at one delay. For example, a retrospective or prospective theory would need the appropriate stimulus at the start of a trial for

the subject to be able to code different responses, or strengths of a trace (Etheridge, 1997). The temporal discrimination hypothesis predicts that a delay to reinforcement will not affect the delay from when the sample stimulus was last seen to the time of responding, and therefore the difficulty of discrimination between the last sample stimulus seen would not be altered (D`Amato, 1973). Thus, if a delay to reinforcement was added to a particular trial delay, performance at that delay should not be altered. There is however, an amount of DMTS data supporting the direct remembering theory (e.g. that each trial delay is independent of each other, in the way that performance at one trial delay can be manipulated by altering it's contingencies, without affecting performance at other delays) (Jones & White, 1992; White & Cooney, 1996; White & Wixted, 1999). Another consistent finding is that as the period of time increases between trials (ITI) accuracy increases (D'Amato, 1973; Grant & Roberts, 1976; White, 1991). For example, White (1985) found that pigeons responding under a DMTS task with an ITI of 0s or 20s all had a much improved accuracy at a 20s ITI. This finding lends support to both the trace-decay theory and temporal discrimination theory. The hypotheses of trace-decay and temporal theories suggest that short ITI's increase the chance of interference from the sample stimulus of the preceding trial. Therefore, longer ITIs are suggested to reduce trace competition and temporal confusion (D'Amato, 1973). A further finding is that increasing the response or duration requirements of the sample stimulus key also improves discrimination

performance (Foster, Temple, MacKenzie, DeMello & Poling, 1995; Roberts, 1972). Roberts (1972) increased the number of responses required on the sample stimulus from 1 to 15 and found that pigeon's accuracy increased as the number of required responses increased. This finding is predicted by both the temporal discrimination theory and coding theories, as they suggest that increasing sample duration or required responses, will increase the time the subject is exposed to the sample stimulus and this allows more time for coding (Smith, 1997). Thus, performance accuracy is predicted to increase. As mentioned earlier the most common finding in DMTS procedures is that as the delay interval increases, accuracy decreases (D'Amato, 1973; White, 1991). According to the temporal discrimination theory, increases in the delay interval leads to decreased accuracy because it increases the probability of temporal confusion. Likewise, the trace-decay theory suggests that as the delay increases, accuracy decreases, because the trace becomes weakened with time. After reviewing these theories, it seems that they all offer an explanation for DMTS data. However, some are more amenable to scientific enquiry than others. When considering trace-decay or temporal discrimination theories it becomes apparent that there is no way to investigate a trace as it decays, or temporal confusion. Whereas, White's (1991) direct remembering theory readily lends itself to experimental analysis. Hence, the direct remembering theory has been well tested, and much support for this theory has emerged (Jones & White, 1992; White & Wixted, 1999).

The present study was an attempt to study short-term memory in possums using a DMTS procedure. Brushtail Possums, Trichosurus Vulpecula, were introduced to New Zealand from Australia in the mid 1900's. Initially they were trapped and their fur sold. However, the New Zealand terrain and climate well suited the possum and it reproduced rapidly. As their numbers increased they began to damage and destroy species of native plant life. Thus, they have since been declared a pest and are currently kept under control in some places by dropping poison. There is very little known about possum behaviour and abilities. This is reflected in the fact that there is nearly no previous research literature available on possums. Studying possums using the DMTS procedure seemed a valid way to obtain some desirable data and to produce some current literature into possum abilities. Because there are no previous studies done on DMTS in possums, it seemed at least sensible to choose stimuli for this study that have been successfully used in a previous study using possums. Previous research by Signal (2001) used an array of psychophysical experiments to test possum abilities. The initial aims of Signal's (2001) research was to train the possums to visually discriminate between still and flickering lights. One of Signal's (2001) main experiments was a Conditional Discrimination task. Here there was one centre light (e.g., either lit still or flicker) and two levers located below and to the sides of the centre light. The possums were required to press the left lever if the light was lit with a flickering light, and the right lever if lit with a still light. The results showed that possums are able to successfully complete a Conditional Discrimination task and thus can also discriminate between a still and flickering light.

Signal's (2001) research established that possums can be trained to visually discriminate between two stimuli and can be particularly accurate at distinguishing between a still and flickering light. For this reason, still and flickering lights were used as stimuli in the first DMTS experiment of this study. The flickering lights in this experiment were at the same flicker rate as used in training in Signal's (2001) research, which was 16.67 Hz (e.g., 0.03s on/0.03s off). The aim of the present study was to examine short-term remembering in the possum using a DMTS procedure. It was expected that discrimination accuracy (measured by log d) would decrease as the delay interval increases, other than at the delays at which the possums are trained at (e.g., 0 seconds). All the possums were originally trained at zero second delay as this seemed to be the most common delay other animals were trained at, and as little is known about possum's abilities it seemed appropriate to begin the procedure at the shortest, simplest delay.

Experiment 1. Method
Subjects The subjects were seven Brushtail Possums, Trichosurus Vulpecula, all of which had previous experience of lever pushing under other schedules (e.g., VI, multiple/concurrent VI.VI, FR). The possums were aged between four and eight years old, five females and two males. The possums morning feed was delivered as reinforcements (e.g., Barley and coco-pops which are a chocolate coated breakfast cereal made by Budget brand) during the morning experimental sessions. Dock leaves (a common pasture weed of the genus, Romex), and apple was weighed out and fed every afternoon, and water was continuously available from inside their cages. They were maintained at an approximately constant body weight. This was monitored and maintained by taking fortnightly weights of the possums and graphing up their individual weights over time.. This way any possum who had gained too much weight would have their Dock leaves reduced and alternatively any possum losing too much weight would be given supplementary post feeds of possum pellets, this was delivered at least one hour after the end of the session. The possum's room stayed on a 12:12 hour reversed light/dark cycle. Their cages were made of thick wire, (except for the front wood door), and had a wood box on top which the possums could climb up into and sleep/hide in. Their cages were cleaned out daily. Apparatus Figure 2 shows the response panel that was attached to the front of each possums cage and remained there permanently. Three square white

lights (small 24-W bulb) were located horizontally on the front door of each possums cage, each light was 30mm wide and were placed 50mm apart. 50mm under each light were the holes for inserting the removable response levers. Once a lever had been inserted about 25mm of the lever protruded into the possums cage for them to respond on. Each lever hole was 80mm apart and the levers were made from a micro-switch with a flat steel operating lever, approximately 50mm long and 5mm wide. A rectangular hole 130mm high and 100mm wide was cut out at the bottom, centre of the response panel which the magazine hopper was fitted into and food reinforcers were made available through a 40mm round hole in the base of the magazine hopper. When a reinforcer was delivered the magazine hopper would raise to allow the possums access to the food through the hole. The reinforcements were a mix of steam flaked barley and coco pops, which are a chocolate coated breakfast cereal, by the brand label Budget. A Compaq computer running MED 2.0 software, interfaced with a MED programmable control board, controlled and recorded all experimental events. Procedure At the start of each session the levers were inserted into the response panel. The sessions commenced during the first hour of the dark phase. During the sessions three red lights (60w) remained on so that the experimenter could see, at the end of each session they were turned and left off for the rest of the 12 hour dark phase. In the 12 hour light phase three (100w) white bulbs remained illuminated. Generally, training sessions were conducted every day, and each session was terminated after either 100 trials or 3600 seconds, which ever came first.

Training, Correct Only Lit. The possums all initially began on a DMTS training programme. During these sessions, each trial commenced with the centre key being lit with either a still or flickering light stimulus. The possums was required to press the middle lever (under the lit light) five times (FR5) to darken the key. Some possums in this experiment originally started on a FR3, however this was later increased to a FR5 with the hope that the greater FR would ensure that the possums had properly attended to the centre sample stimulus. Then one of the comparison light stimuli was illuminated with the same still or flickering light stimulus that had just been presented on the centre light. Thus, only the correct response was illuminated per training trial and reinforcement was delivered upon every correct response to the lit stimulus. If the possum responded on the lever under the darkened light then no reinforcement was delivered. The trial ended after either a correct or incorrect response with an ITI of 6 seconds. Some of the possums in this experiment started on a different ITI of 10 seconds. However, after an amount of sessions at this ITI a decision was made to decrease the ITI to 6 seconds. This was done in support of the notion that an ITI of 10s may be too long and could be effecting the results of the DMTS trials The possums stayed on this training programme for two weeks before starting the actual experiment. Three of the possums whose percentage correct did not increase over the training sessions, had differential reinforcement introduced into their DMTS trials. This entailed having different reinforcement durations for correct responses to the still or flickering light stimuli, these reinforcement

durations are then reversed for a further amount of sessions. a 4 second reinforcement for a correct response to a still light and 1 second for a correct response to a flickering light and then is reversed for an amount of sessions to 1 second reinforcement for a correct response to a still light and 4 seconds for a correct response to a flickering light. Delayed Matching to Sample sessions. Every trial in each session commenced with the lighting of the centre key (sample stimulus) with either a still or flickering light. The flicker rate was 16.67 Hz (i.e., 0.03 on/0.03 off). The possum was required to press the centre lever five times (FR 5) to darken the centre light and begin the delay interval (0 seconds). At the end of the delay interval, the two comparison light stimuli illuminate, one being a still light and one a flickering light. Pressing the lever that corresponded to the matching comparison stimuli was considered correct, while pressing the lever that did not correspond to the matching comparison stimuli was deemed incorrect. Initially, the possums were pseudorandomly delivered reinforcement for correct responses, depending on side allocation only. This meant the possums gained reinforcement only if their next correct response was on the side lever next offering reinforcement. After roughly two weeks the reinforcement rate was changed to a VR5 schedule. Under this schedule a accurate lever/stimulus choice was reinforced around approximately every 5 correct responses, but/and only if the response occurs on the lever next due reinforcement. If the possums responding stopped or lessened dramatically over time, then the VR schedule was considered too high and was successively decreased until responding increased and stabilized. Following a response

made on the comparison side light stimuli, reinforcement may be delivered and a 6 second ITI ended the trial. On completion of the ITI a new DMTS trial begins with the illumination of the centre light stimulus. The possums were required to obtain 80 percent correct at a 0 second delay, for at least five consecutive days to successfully obtain the criterion for probe testing. Once a possums performance had reached criterion level they were tested using a probe session. A probe session involved 60 trials of 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 8 second delays (maximum of 10 trials at each delay) that were pseudorandomly selected without replacement and inserted into the 100 normal training trials. Reinforcement was available for all correct responses on normal trials. A probe trial terminated after either 160 trials or 5200 seconds, which ever came first. Once the possum had successfully completed a sufficient amount of sessions, usually 1000 trials, then their data was graphed. The possum was then required to perform the same DMTS task at an increased delay (i.e., 1 second delay). As the delays are increased the requirements of the DMTS procedure remain the same, except that the delay between the centre light stimulus darkening and the two comparison light stimuli illuminating increases with the implemented delay, (e.g., from 0 to a 1 second delay). Once the possum's accuracy reached criterion at the following longer delay, then probe sessions commenced, after completion of which the delay was further increased. If alternatively, the possums's accuracy in responding showed no signs of improvement at a higher delay, then the current delay would be reduced back to the previous delay the possum experienced.

Summary of experimental conditions experienced by each possum. Maggie: FR3, ITI 10, differential reinforcement, differential reinforcement alternated, equal reinforcement, FR5, ITI 6. Emma: FR3, ITI 10, equal reinforcement, FR5, ITI 6. Benny: FR3, ITI 10, equal reinforcement, FR5, ITI 6. Bonnie: Equal reinforcement, FR5, ITI 6, differential reinforcement, differential and simultaneous, equal reinforcement, FR5, ITI 6.

Xanth: Equal reinforcement, FR5, ITI 6. Vela: Equal reinforcement, FR5, ITI 6.

Holly: FR3, ITI 10, equal reinforcement, FR5, ITI 6, differential reinforcement, differential and simultaneous, reinforcement reduction and simultaneous.

Key: P - FR3, ITI 10. N - equal reinforcement, FR5, ITI 6. RR - reinforcement reduction. simultaneous RC - reinforcement change. D - differential reinforcement. DA - differential alternated. DS - differential and S - simultaneous.

Results
For each possum, the percent of correct responses to comparison stimuli was calculated at each training delay they completed. The number of sessions each possum completed varied depending on how long it took them to reach criterion at their current training delay. Figures 3 and 4 show the percent of correct responses, session by session, for all possums at each delay they were trained at. Figures 5 and 6 showed the data from the probe sessions, log d and log c respectively. Figure 3 shows all seven possum's percent correct over the training sessions at a zero second delay. Maggie was one of the first possums to participate in this DMTS experiment and began on a FR3 schedule for centre lever presses and an ITI of 10 seconds (condition P) for about the first 100 sessions before being changed to a FR5 requirement and a 6 second ITI (condition N). Maggie's data on panel 1 of Figure 3, showed that her behaviour was relatively stable at 50 percent correct at the zero second delay. Because of her low accuracy, differential reinforcement was introduced (i.e., 4 second reinforcement for a correct response to a still light and 1 second for a correct response to a flickering light), this was implemented for 50 sessions and accuracy can be seen to have improved to approximately 80 percent correct.

Figure 3. All possum's percent correct at zero second training delay.

Key. P - FR 3, ITI 10 s N - equal reinforcement FR 5, ITI 6s S RR - reinforcement reduction RC - reinforcement change

D - differential reinforcement - simultaneous DA - differential alternated DS - differential & simultaneous

The reinforcement schedule was then reversed for the following 30 sessions, (one second reinforcement for a correct response to a still light and four seconds for a correct response to a flickering light), before finally changing to and remaining on an equal reinforcement schedule of 3 seconds. After these condition changes Maggie's accuracy in responding became stable at around 80 percent correct. Before Maggie could commence training at a 1 second delay she unfortunately became very sick and was consequently humanely put down by a registered vet. Her autopsy revealed that her intestines had stopped functioning, and while the vet could not determine why this happened, it was evident that Maggie's condition was not related in any way to the current experiment. Emma (second panel down on Figure 3) also started this experiment on a FR3 centre lever requirement and an ITI of 10 seconds (labelled P) for 130 sessions, before her schedules were altered to a FR5 and ITI of 6 seconds (labelled N). Emma's accuracy in responding at the 0 second delay showed little improvement over the first 70 sessions. Yet, over the next 50 sessions her accuracy steadily improved and became stable at around 80 percent correct. Benny (third panel down) performed on condition P for the first 140 sessions of this experiment before it was changed to condition N. During which time his performance in terms of percent correct steadily increased to above 80 percent, by session 160 his responding had stabilised and he had achieved the criterion for probe testing at a 0 second delay. After completing probe sessions, the DMTS trial delay Benny was performing upon was

increased from 0 to a 1 second training delay. Bonnie (fourth panel down on Figure 3) began this experiment on a FR5 and ITI of 6 seconds (labelled N). Over the first 60 sessions her accuracy in responding showed no signs of improvement and instead remained stable at 50 percent correct. At this point a differential reinforcement schedule was introduced (labelled condition D), (i.e., 4 seconds reinforcement for a correct response to a still light and 1 second reinforcement for a correct response to a flickering light) for 30 sessions. This is shown to have little effect on improving accuracy her accuracy, so the reinforcement schedule was then reversed (DS), (i.e., 1 second reinforcement for a correct response to a still light and 4 seconds for a correct response to a flickering light) for the next 80 sessions before resuming to the normal condition (labelled N, FR5 and 6 second ITI). Figure 3 showed that from about session 120 and steadily over the following 60 sessions Bonnie's responding steady improved up to 75 percent correct. However, throughout this experiment her performance never reached a high enough level to meet the criterion for probe testing. Xanth (fifth panel down of Figure 3) began the 0 second training delay on a FR5 and ITI of 6 seconds (labelled N), this remained the only condition he experienced in this experiment. Xanth very quickly (within 20 sessions) reached criterion at a 0 second delay. His responding accuracy then stabilised at 90 percent correct. His responding performance was then probe tested prior to resuming to the DMTS procedure at an increased 1 second delay.

Vela (sixth panel down on Figure 3) started out on condition N and continued on it over all the sessions she completed at the 0 second training delay. Vela's accuracy can be seen to steadily improve in percent correct from session 75 through to session 340 to just under or at 80 percent correct. However, Vela did not meet the full requirements for the criteria to probe at the 0 second delay. Holly (seventh panel down) began on the initial conditions FR3 and ITI of 10 (P) for the first 115 sessions before going onto condition N (FR5 and an ITI of 6) for the next 55 sessions. Holly's accuracy stayed relatively stable at around 50 percent correct without improvement throughout both condition P and N. Differential reinforcement (D) was then implemented to see if that would help improve her percent correct, (4 second reinforcement for a correct response to a still light and 1 second reinforcement for a correct response to a flickering light). After 40 sessions at this condition with no change the differential reinforcement condition was reversed to (DS) (1 seconds reinforcement for a correct response to a still light and 4 seconds for a correct response to a flickering light). However, this showed no effect in terms of increasing Holly's percent correct. Holly's condition then resumed to condition N and instead a restricted reinforcement condition (RR) was implemented to try and improve her accuracy. Here access time to food reinforcements during each session was cut down from 3 seconds to 2 seconds for 60 sessions. This also had no effect on her percent correct.

A simultaneous sample-choice (no delay) procedure was introduced at session 260 for the next 10 sessions, labelled S on panel 7. Holly's accuracy in terms of percent correct began to increase to nearly 75 percent. Equal reinforcement of 3 seconds was then re-introduced, and her percent correct improved over the next 100 sessions to over 80 percent correct. Holly's responding was then probed at the 0 second delay. Following this her training delay was increased to 1 second. There were no similarities in how long it took the possums to reach criterion at a 0 second delay. Other than Xanth it took the other possums hundreds of sessions and some exposure to multiple types of conditions before they reached criterion. Only four of the seven possums reached a sufficiently high level of performance to be able to complete probe testing and carry on with the DMTS experiment at a 1 second delay. Figure 4 shows the results of the possums who participated in the 1 and 2 second training delay procedures. Emma (panel one on Figure 4) commenced this experiment on condition N (FR5 and ITI 6 sec) and remained on it overall the sessions she conducted at the 1 second training delay.

Figure 4. Percent correct at a one and two second training delay.

Key. N ­ equal-reinforcement, FR 5, ITI 6s RR ­ reinforcement reduction RC ­ reinforcement change

Emma's accuracy is shown to remain relatively stable at 60 percent correct over the first 60 sessions. Over the next 200 sessions her responding accuracy slowly starts to increase, occasionally making 80 percent correct. Emma sadly died from a twisted intestine before making the criterion for probe testing at a 1 second training delay. Benny (panel two on Figure 4) stayed on the normal condition (N) the whole of his 1 second training delay. A restricted reinforcement condition was added at session 140 as Benny was becoming overweight. Here Benny's access time to food reinforcements during the session was cut down from 3 seconds to 2 seconds. Benny initially reached criterion much faster (within 20 sessions) at the 1 second training delay compared to the 120 sessions it took for him to reach criterion at the 0 second training delay. At the two second delay Benny's percent correct steadily increased over the first 120 sessions, during which time he reached criterion and subsequently had his performance probe tested. Xanth (panel three) was on condition N while participating in the 1 second training. At session 115 a reinforcement restriction condition (the same as described previously) was added. At session 190 Xanth's reinforcement was changed from barley and coco-pops to possum pellets and coco-pops, as he had not to be eating his reinforcements. This is labelled RC on the third panel of Figure 4. Xanth's accuracy at responding on a 1 second training delay, is shown on Figure 4 to progressively improve and reach criterion relatively quickly, as had his responding at the zero second training delay. His performance at the one second training delay was then probe tested. After

completing a sufficient amount of probe trials (i.e., to obtain enough data to sufficiently calculate and graph up log d and log c results) at the 1 second training delay, the training delay was then increased to 2 seconds. Xanth also reached criterion quickly at the 2 second training delay, the same as the behaviour shown on the 0 and 1 second training delays. Sadly, he only completed 1 probe session before becoming sick with badly congested lungs. It quickly became evident that he was not going to recover and so he was humanely put down by a registered vet. Holly (panel four) started out with condition N on the 1 second training delay. Over the first 120 sessions Holly's responding showed no signs of improvement, and instead remained stable at 50 percent correct. As a consequence, Holly's training delay was lowered back to a 0 second training delay. Over the following 60 sessions Holly's accuracy gradually improved and increased up to 80 percent correct. However, her performance was not quite sufficient to meet the criterion of 80 percent correct for five consecutive days. Holly therefore did not complete any further probe testing at the 0 second training delay. Similarly to the data from the 0 second delay there were no major trends or commonalities apparent in the one second results. Only Xanth and Benny met criterion at a one second training delay and experienced probe testing. Xanth reached criterion quickly, as he had at the 0 second delay, whereas Benny reached criterion at a 1 second training delay faster than he did at a 0 second training delay.

Figure 5 presents log d from 0, 1 and 2 second training delay probe sessions for all the possums who completed them. During the 0 second probe sessions the possums showed the greatest level of discrimination towards the 0 second probe delay, which is the only delay these possums had ever received training at. In comparison, at the following longer and unexperienced probe delays the possum's ability to discriminate which was the correct stimulus decreased to log d = 0. During the 1 second delay probes, log d was slightly lower at the 0 second delay than it had been in the 0 second training delay probes. However, log d was higher at the 0.5 and 1 second delays in the 1 second training delay probes, than it had been in the 0 second training delay probes. Performance at the 2, 4, and 8 second probe delays all decreased to log d = 0 during the 1 second training probes.

Figure 5. log d at a zero, one and two second delay.

Only Benny's performance reached the standard required to fill the criteria for probe testing at a 2 second training delay. The results from Benny's 2 second delay probe sessions are presented on Figure 5. Benny's log d scores are substantially higher on his 2 second training delay graph, than depicted in the graphed 0 and 1 second probe tests On the 2 second training delay probes Benny's performance in terms of discrimination accuracy, at a 0, 0.5 and 1 second delay also remained close to a score of log d = 1. Whereas, at the 4 and 8 second probe delays discrimination reduced to log d = 0. After training and subsequent probe tests on the 0 second training delay, Holly, Vela, Xanth, Benny and Emma's results were also summed into log d scores. In the 0 second probes the possums all scored close to log d = 1. However, over the following longer probe delays inexperienced by these possums their discrimination accuracy was seen to decline to log d = 0. The results of the 1 second training probes are also presented on Figure 5. Discrimination in terms of log d peaked for all the possums (Emma, Benny and Xanth) at the 1 second probe delay and at the shorter 0 and 0.5 second probe delays, (in which they are already accomplished with). Figure 6 showed log c from the 0, 1 and 2 second probe sessions. All log c values were close to zero and did not vary systematically. There are no biases in the possums responding to either a particular side lever or one type of light stimulus in the 0, 1 or 2 second training or probe delays, as is evident from Figure 6.

Figure 6. log c at a zero, one and two second delay.

Discussion
The aim of this research was to study possum's remembering accuracy over short delays using the DMTS procedure, and to establish some experimental literature on Possum's cognitive and sensory abilities. Though not all the possums in this experiment managed to meet the criterion for probe testing at a 0, 1 and 2 second training delay, the overall aim of this research was achieved. Each possum was different in how long they took to learn the DMTS procedure, and some of the possum's performances were not successful enough to reach the criterion to be probe tested. Maggie responded with increased accurately after being exposed to the differential reinforcement conditions, whereas differential reinforcement failed to improve Holly's responding accuracy. Rather Holly's accuracy in responding increased after the simultaneous-choice procedure was implemented. However, Holly showed no improvement once on the 1 second training delay, so her condition was changed back to a 0 second training delay. Once Benny had been trained on a DMTS procedure at a 0 second training delay, his accuracy increased quickly at both the 1 and 2 second training delay. Xanth had a high performance accuracy at each training delay he completed, reaching the criterion to probe test within 30 sessions at both a 0 and 2 second training delay. Though it took him much longer to reach criterion at a 1 second training delay, closer to 70 sessions. This is still considerably fast when compared to the amount of sessions taken by the other possums to obtain criterion. Because there are no previous DMTS studies involving possums, it is hard to establish whether the rate in which these possum's accuracy increased is fast or slow. In comparison to other species

(e.g., chickens, pigeons) it is relatively slow (Grant, 1981). The biggest limitation of this study is that very little, to no previous research has been done on the possum, specifically no prior DMTS research. Thus, no DMTS research findings are available that this study can be directly compared and generalised to. While it has been established by Signal (2001) that possums can distinguish between a still and flickering light, we are unaware of the degree to which these stimuli are visible in comparison to the many other stimuli that could be used in a DMTS procedure. For example, it is a possibility that all the possums in this experiment may have reached criterion if the stimuli had been different. The fact that it took a particularly long time for most of the possums to reach the criterion for probe testing at a 0 second training delay, is a limitation to the results available in this study. A further limitation was the death of three of the subjects, especially Xanth who was the most successful and efficient possum at reaching the criterion for probe testing at the 0, 1 and 2 second delays. More research using the DMTS procedure is needed before any concrete conclusions can be made on short-term remembering processes in the possum. However, the results of this study suggest that they are best at recalling stimuli at a delay they have had experience with (e.g. the training delay) and at the delays closest to the training delay. It would be interesting to do a similar study to Sargisson and White's (2001) and train the possums at a range of unconventional delays and then administer probe sessions, then retrain and probe them at a 0 second delay. If the results of this kind of research consistently showed higher discrimination accuracy (log d) at the

training delays, (e.g., peaks in the forgetting function at the trained delay, and/or a systematic decrement in accuracy with increasing delays if trained at the conventional 0 second delay). This would then support the notion that each delay is independent and that responding depends on experience (White & Cooney, 1996). However, it is dubious to whether the possums would achieve the criterion level for probe testing if we tried to train them at higher unconventional delays, as most of the possums in this study were slow or unable to reach criterion at a simple 0 or 1 second training delay. Although possums have been shown to discriminate between still and flickering light stimuli (Signal, 2001) it is possible that the nature of these stimuli makes them unsuitable for studying DMTS in possum's. It is proposed that the difficulties the possums are having with this DMTS task could be a result of difficulties in discriminating the stimuli, rather than the difficulties being innate in the task. For this reason, it is important to conduct another experiment to further examine DMTS in possums using different light stimuli.

Experiment two.
The aim of this experiment was fundamentally the same as in Experiment one. This was to use a DMTS procedure to study short-term remembering in the possum, with the intention of gaining knowledge of possum's sensory and perceptual abilities. In this experiment the light stimuli used are different, they were changed horizontal and vertical light stimuli (instead of the still and flickering lights previously used). These stimuli were selected because they had been used effectively in a previous experiment on possums by Webster (1975). Webster (1975) set up a discrimination task using pre-sliced pieces of carrot in either a horizontal or vertical shape to use as the stimuli for the possum subjects to discriminate between (e.g., if the two pieces of carrot are horizontal go left or if the two pieces of carrot is vertical go right). In this experiment each trial began with Webster (1975) placing two similar sized and shaped pieces of carrot stimuli (e.g., either both horizontal or both vertical shaped) into the two response boxes. The response boxes were just simply holes cut into the top left and right hand side of the panel wood door, through which the possums could reach in to remove the piece of carrot. If the two carrot stimuli were horizontal shaped then the possum was only able to remove the piece of carrot out of the left hand response box. Whereas, if the two carrot stimuli were vertical shaped then the possum could only extract the carrot from the right hand response box. If the possums executes a correct response then they were reinforced by being able to remove the carrot stimulus out of the response box and then subsequently eat it, thus ending the trial. However, if the possum's response

was incorrect then they will not be able to remove the carrot stimuli from the response box and this ends the trial ended. Unfortunately, Webster's (1975) research and results are limited by flaws in his experimental design. One of the limitations of this study is that Webster (1975) conducted his sessions during the day under full white light, when possums are naturally nocturnal animals and would normally be asleep during such light hours. Another limitation is the fact that Webster (1975) had to physically prepare even sized horizontal and vertical shaped pieces of carrot stimuli ready for each session and then manually position them into the right place of the two response boxes for each and every trial. This would not just be incredibly time consuming but likely to significantly disruptive the possums performance during the experimental session and subsequently their results. Despite the above limitations Webster (1975) concluded from his results that possums could successfully complete a Go left/Go right discrimination procedure and thus also efficiently discriminate between a horizontal and vertical shaped stimulus. The results from Webster`s (1975) study and the fact that there are no other research experiments available on possums to generalise from, lead to the conclusion that the most appropriate stimuli to trial in the next DMTS experiment are horizontal and vertical lights.

Method
Subjects The subjects were ten Brushtail Possums (four from Experiment one, Benny, Bonnie, Vela and Holly). All feeding, weighing and other general experimental procedures were conducted the same as in Experiment one. Apparatus All of the apparatus remained the same as in Experiment one, other than the change from the still and flickering light stimuli used in experiment one to horizontal and vertical light stimuli for this experiment. These stimuli were formed by lighting a horizontal or vertical row in a matrix of LED's. They were located in the same place on the response panel as the previous light stimuli had been. However, the new lights were considerably larger, 45mm in width and 60mm in length. This required removing the previous light stimuli from the response panel and enlarging the three holes where they had been, to accommodate the larger horizontal and vertical light stimuli used in this experiment. The changes in measurements that occurred as a result of adding the three larger light stimuli to the response panel, are depicted in Figure 7.

300mm

70mm

45mm

42.5mm

60mm

50mm 10mm 80mm

50mm 100mm 500mm

130mm

100mm

Figure 7. The response panel; Modified for Experiment two. e

The alterations made were minimal and are as detailed. Firstly, the new light stimuli consumed more space in millimetres from the response panel, and so the space between each light stimuli reduced from 50 to 42mm and the difference between the top of the light stimuli and the top of the response door decreased from 100mm to 70mm. Procedure The sessions were conducted similarly to Experiment one, including training at the 0 second delay and the criteria for probe testing. All the possums conducted each trial on a FR5 requirement for centre lever presses and an ITI of 6 seconds at the end of each trial. The main difference (apart from the change in light stimuli) between the current and the previous experiment is that in the present study, after a considerable number of sessions with no improvement in the possum's responding, a Simultaneous-Choice procedure was introduced for all possums. The Simultaneous-Choice procedure is fundamentally the same as a DMTS procedure; in that to successfully complete each trial the possum has to pair the centre sample stimulus to the matching comparison light stimulus. However, in a Simultaneous-Choice procedure no delays added and the centre light stimulus remains lit even after the possum has met the requirement to turn on the comparison light stimuli (i.e., by responding on the centre key five times (FR5), which illuminates the comparison light stimuli). The centre sample stimulus light remains illuminated simultaneously with the two comparison light stimuli, until a response is made on either one of the side levers, correct or incorrect. Reinforcement is available under the same

schedules and contingencies as in the DMTS procedure in Experiment one. Each trial ended with an ITI of 6 seconds. Thus, in a Simultaneous-choice procedure the possum is not required to recall the centre stimulus to make an accurate response, but instead requires straight matching-to-sample. Three of the possums (Bonnie, Vela and Holly) were longer at completing the requirements of Experiment one, than what it took the other possums. At the time Bonnie, Vela and Holly had finished Experiment one and were able to participate with this experiment, the other seven possum's experimental condition had recently been changed to a Simultaneous-Choice procedure. So it seemed most appropriate to start these possums on the Simultaneous-Choice procedure as well. At least this way the possums all commenced the simultaneous condition at the same time.

Results
Figure 8 showed the results of all ten possum's responding in percent correct overall and to each horizontal or vertical stimuli, at both a 0 second training delay and Simultaneous-Choice procedure. All the possums (except Holly's) responding stayed stable over all the sessions they completed (up to 110 sessions, even after the simultaneous procedure was introduced. Only Holly who started this experiment on the Simultaneous-Choice procedure, showed improvements in accuracy over the sessions. By session 50 Holly's percent correct was around 80 percent correct. However, her behaviour did not meet the criterion of five consecutive days at 80 percent correct and therefore was not probe tested. The other possums in this experiment accuracies stayed stable at 50 percent without improvement over the total sessions, neither did any of them demonstrate any biases towards left or right or horizontal or vertical, or a combination of these. Holly on the other hand did show biases. Holly's results are presented on the last three panels of Figure 8, shown in percent correct overall and per horizontal or vertical trial. The results shown in the bottom horizontal and vertical panels are strong evidence that Holly had developed a side bias to the horizontal but not the vertical light stimulus. When Holly had to match a vertical light stimulus she could respond correctly on either the left or right lever but if Holly had to match the horizontal lights she always pressed the left hand lever.

Figure 8. Percent correct overall and on horizontal and vertical trials at a zero second training delay and on a Simultaneous-Choice procedure. Key. Dotted line indicates when the possum changed from the zero second training delay to the Simultaneous-Choice procedure.

Thus, her responses to the horizontal lever were still seen to be correct half the time and incorrect half the time (e.g., if the horizontal light was on the left her response was always correct and if the horizontal light was on the right her response was always incorrect because she always pressed the left lever).

Discussion.
The results of this experiment are very limited and really only show that in general possums are unable (at least in this case) to successfully complete either a DMTS or Simultaneous choice procedure using horizontal or vertical lights as stimuli. Only Holly's responding improved over time on the Simultaneous-Choice procedure, but her performance was still not sufficiently high enough to be probe tested. Her results show that she developed some unusual side (left versus right) and light (horizontal verus vertical) biases in responding. These could be an indication that the stimuli are difficult to discriminate between, maybe even to a higher degree than the still and flickering light stimuli used in the previous experiment. The fact that Holly could accurately match the centre light if it was vertical but responded mainly on the left lever if it was a horizontal centre light could be a sign that vertical lights are easier to discriminate from than a horizontal light. Or perhaps the horizontal light was not discriminable at all and perhaps this is why Holly always chose to press the left hand lever. After all she would have still received reinforcement for this response, as she would be correct for approximately half her left hand lever responses. As a consequence of Holly's results, it cannot be concluded that possum's are unable to discriminate between a horizontal and vertical stimulus. The results detailed in Figure 8 from panel one to panel nine downwards, show that the other nine possums (namely Charlotte, Cindy, Marmite, Spock, Putzy, Benny, Bonnie, Gavin and Vela) accuracy in responding did not improve past 50 percent over the total sessions they completed in this experiment. Thus, they were not able to successfully

complete either a DMTS or MTS task, and were simply responding at a level of chance. Whether this is caused by difficulties due to the stimuli or the task cannot be verified from these results. It seems imperative from the results of this experiment to find out whether possums are able to discriminate between a horizontal and vertical light stimulus. This way conclusions could be made about whether the possum's difficulties lay with the MTS task or the stimuli.

Experiment Three.
The aim of the following experiment was to establish whether possums could in fact discriminate between a horizontal and vertical light stimulus, identical to the ones used in the previous experiment. This was achieved by implementing a Conditional Discrimination procedure, similar to the one conducted by Signal (2001), with the main difference being the horizontal and vertical light stimuli. Signal (2001) attained a reasonable amount of success in getting possums to perform a conditional discrimination task (e.g., go left if still light/right if flickering light), so it was anticipated that the possums in this task should be at least as successful. If they were unable to perform the present conditional discrimination task, one could make the conclusion that the difficulties experienced by the possums in completing either a DMTS or MTS task, to be due to difficulties with the stimuli rather than with the task itself. In the present study a correct response was obtained by the possums responding to a lit horizontal centre light by pressing the left hand lever and responding to a lit vertical centre light by pressing the right hand lever. Thus, this experimental task only required the centre light as a stimulus (the two side lights remained in place attached within the response panel but were never illuminated during this time). There was also no centre lever requirements as all responding was done on either one of the side levers. Thus, the centre lever was removed for this experiment.

Method
Subjects The subjects were nine Brushtail possums (two from the previous experiment; Benny and Holly). All feeding, weighing and general procedures are the same as in Experiment one. Apparatus The response panel remains the same as in Figure 7. However, the two side lights are not used in this experiment and neither is the middle lever so it was removed. All other apparatus used remained the same as in the previous experiments. Procedure Sessions began and were conducted under the same conditions as were the previous experiments. Each experimental session was terminated after either 100 trials or 2400 seconds, which ever came first. The total time was shorter in this experiment than in the previous ones because the individual trials took less time to complete than a DMTS trial. Each trial began with the illumination of the centre key with either a horizontal or vertical light stimulus. To achieve a correct response the possum was required to press the left hand lever if the centre light was horizontal and the right hand lever if the centre light was vertical. Reinforcement was available on a VR5 schedule, so roughly every five correct responses were reinforced, when that response was made on the side lever next due reinforcement. Upon a correct response the centre light darkens, reinforcement may be delivered and an ITI of 6 seconds begins. If the possum made an incorrect choice (e.g., pressing the left lever for a vertical centre light

or the right lever for a horizontal centre light) the centre light immediately darkens and an ITI of 6 seconds starts. The criterion for successful completion of this experiment was five consecutive days at or above 80 percent correct. No initial training procedures were conducted.

Results
Figure 9 represents the results in percent correct overall and for each light stimulus. All of the possums (except Benny who died) reached criterion and successfully completed this experimental task. Majority of the possums reached criterion between session 30 to 40, with Vela taking the longest requiring 80 sessions to complete this experiment. There are no evident trends or biases in responding to either the horizontal or vertical light stimulus. Both the horizontal and vertical light stimuli are reflected by the results of Figure 9 to be as equally and readily discriminable as each other. Josh (panel 1 on Figure 8) reached 80 percent correct quickly within the first 40 sessions. However, he initially showed a higher accuracy with the horizontal light stimulus, and took nearly 60 sessions to reach 80 percent correct on a vertical light stimulus. Marmite (panel 2) took 50 sessions to reach 80 percent correct overall and on the horizontal and vertical stimuli. Tom (panel 3) quickly reached 80 percent correct on this task, overall and on both stimuli. Putzy (panel 4) was also quick to reach 80 percent correct overall. However, it took her longer nearly, 60 sessions, to reach 80 percent correct on the horizontal light stimulus, in comparison 20 sessions on the vertical light stimulus. Benny (panel 5) never reached the criterion of this task before he became sick and needed to be humanely put to sleep.

Figure 9. Percent correct overall and on horizontal and vertical trials, on a horizontal versus vertical conditional discrimination procedure.

Bonnie and Gavin's results (panels 6 and 7 respectively) show that they both quickly obtained 80 percent correct within the first 20 sessions, overall and on both light stimuli. No biases towards the horizontal or vertical stimuli are evident in their results. Vela's (panel 8) responding performance took the longest to reach criterion, nearly 80 sessions. No significant differences are seen between horizontal and vertical responding. Holly, whose results are depicted in panel 9 of Figure 9, also had no problem obtaining criterion and completing the requirements of this study. When comparing her responses to the two light stimuli, she was faster to gain accuracy at responding to the horizontal rather than vertical stimulus. Overall, Figure 9 represents that the possums in this experiment could successfully and equally discriminate between the horizontal and vertical stimulus.

Discussion
The results of this study show that possums are capable of successfully completing a conditional discrimination procedure and more importantly are able to distinguish between a horizontal and vertical stimulus. Some of the possums displayed a slightly faster or more accurate responding performance to one of the stimuli over the other. However, the fact that the possums all responded at or above 80 percent correct on both the horizontal and vertical light stimuli is enough to conclude that they are both are as distinguishable as each other. No other biases are evident from the results. Other than Vela who took 80 sessions to complete the task and Benny who became ill, the other seven possums completed this task quickly and efficiently. These results are verification that it could not have been the stimuli causing the difficulties in the previous experiments but instead the DMTS task.

General Discussion
Because no one has ever done DMTS with possums before this, it is hard to exactly why the possums are having such difficulties with the task. It would be hard to believe that the possums species has no or is not capable of short-term remembering. But why or where the possums are having difficulty with the task is not known. The fact that a few of the possums managed to successfully complete the DMTS procedure at a 0, 1 and 2 second delay with the still and flickering stimuli, certainly means that they are all should be capable of performing the task. However, this was not the case in this study. It is evident that they are all capable of discriminating successfully between the horizontal and vertical stimuli but are not successful when the task requires them to match these two stimuli. Further research into DMTS in possums is essentially needed before a greater understanding of and more concrete conclusions can be made, about the difficulties experienced by the possums in this study.

References
Baum, W. M. (1974). On two types of deviation from the matching law: Bias and under matching. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behaviour, 22, 231-242.

Baum, W. M. (1979). Matching, under matching, and overmatching in studies of choice. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behaviour, 32, 269-281.

Blough, D. S. (1959). Delayed matching in the pigeon. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behaviour, 2, 151-169.

D'Amato, M. R. (1973). Delayed matching and short-term memory in monkeys. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation, Vol 7. (pp 227-269). New York: Academic Press.

Davison, M.C., & McCarthy, D. C. (1988). The matching law. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Erlbaum.

Davison, M. C., & Tustin, R. D. (1978). The relation between the generalised matching law and signal-detection theory. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behaviour, 29, 331-336.

Etheridge, R. (1997). Delayed matching to sample: The effects of delaying reinforcement at a single post-sample stimulus delay. Master of Social

Science thesis. University of Waikato, Hamilton.

Foster, T. M., Temple. W., MacKenzie, C., DeMello, L. R., & Poling, A. (1995). Delayed Matching to sample performance in hens: Effects of sample duration and response requirements during the sample. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behaviour, 64, 19-31.

Grant, D. S. (1981). Short term memory in the pigeon. In N. E. Spear & R. R. Miller (Ed.), Information processing in animals: Memory mechanisms (pp. 227-256). Hillsdale, New Jersey: Erlbaum.

Grant, D. S., & Roberts, W. A. (1973). Trace interaction in pigeon short-term memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 101, 21-29.

Herman, L. M. (1975). Interference and auditory short-term memory in the bottle- nose dolphin. Animal Learning and Behaviour, 3, 43-48.

Hernstein, R. J. (1961). Relative And absolute strength of response as a function of frequency of reinforcement. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behaviour, 4, 267-283.

Honig, W. K. (1978). Studies of working memory in the pigeon. In S.H. Hulse, H. Fowler & W. K. Honig (Eds.), Cognitive processes in animal behaviour (pp. 211-248). Hillsdale, New Jersey: Erlbaum.

Honig W. K., & Thompson, R. K. R. (1982). Retrospective and prospective processing in animal working memory. In G. H. Bower (Eds.), The psychology of learning and motivation (pp. 239-283). New York: Academic Press.

Iverson, I. H. (1993). Acquisition of matching to sample performance in rats using visual stimuli on nose keys. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behaviour, 59, 471-282.

Jones, B. M., & White, K. G. (1992). Sample-stimulus discriminability and sensitivity to reinforcement in delayed matching to sample. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behaviour, 58, 159-172.

McCarthy, D., & Davison, M. (1980). Signal probability, reinforcement and signal detection. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behaviour, 32, 373-386.

Roberts, W. A. (1972). Short-term memory in the pigeon: Effects of repetition and spacing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behaviour Processes, 4, 68-82.

Signal, T. (2001). Assessing psychophysical abilities in Brushtail possums. Doctor of Philosophy psychology thesis. University of Waikato, Hamilton.

Smith, K. (1997). Delayed matching to sample with hens: The effects of training with a 4-s delay. Master of Social Sciences thesis. University of Waikato, Hamilton.

Weavers, R., Foster, M., & Temple, W. (1998). Reinforcer efficacy in a delayed matching-to-sample task. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behaviour, 69, 77-85.

Webster, D. (1975). Interhemispheric transfer in a marsupial: A behavioural investigation of interhemispheric transfer of visual information in Trichosurus vulpecular. Doctor of Philosophy psychology thesis. University of Auckland, Auckland.

White, K. G. (1985). Characteristics of forgetting functions in delayed matching to sample. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behaviour, 44, 15-34.

White, K. G. (1991). Psychophysics of direct remembering. In M. L. Commons, J. A. Nevin & M. C. Davison (Eds.), Signal detection: Mechanisms, models, and applications (pp. 221-237). Hillsdale, New Jersey: Erlbaum.

White, K. G., & Cooney, E. B. (1996). Consequences of remembering: Independence of performance at different retention intervals. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal behaviour processes, 22, 51-59.

White, K. G., & Wixted, J. T. (1999). Psychophysics of remembering. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behaviour, 71, 91-113.

Wixted, J. T. (1989). Nonhuman short-term memory: A quantitative reanalysis of selected findings. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behaviour, 52, 409-426.

Appendix
The data for each possum, each session and each experiment.

Matching to Sample, Still versus Flicker, 0 second delay and some Simultaneous Presentation and Differential Reinforcement. Possums: 3=Maggie, 5=Emma, 6=Benny, 7=Bonnie, 8=Xanth, 9=Vela, 10=Holly. All sessions 3600 seconds. Pos=possum, Del=Delay, L=Left, R=Right, cor=correct, inc=incorrect, Rft=reinforcement, %=Percent correct. Still Flicker Still Flicker Pos Date Del Lco LincRcor RincLRft RRft Lcor LincRcoRincLRftRRft % PosDate Del Lco LincRcoRincLRft RRf Lco LincRcoRincLRft RRf % 10s ITI, FR 3 3 10808 0 21 11 5 16 7 3 12 14 16 13 10 8 50 3 11705 0 2 0 9 1 2 9 1 6 5 1 5 1 68 3 10908 0 14 9 16 15 5 10 13 17 6 16 1 7 46 3 11008 0 15 15 7 19 7 4 11 15 18 11 9 5 46 3 11805 0 0 7 11 0 0 11 0 7 11 0 11 0 61 3 12105 0 0 12 9 0 0 9 0 12 11 0 11 0 45 3 11408 0 2 3 4 6 0 2 1 9 3 2 2 1 33 3 12205 0 1 20 17 0 1 17 0 22 16 0 16 0 45 3 11508 0 15 10 13 16 8 8 10 21 10 12 4 6 45 3 12205 0 4 9 11 0 4 11 3 9 10 1 10 3 60 3 10409 0 19 19 23 19 9 12 20 17 16 27 10 16 49 3 10509 0 22 22 23 21 11 13 25 27 15 19 9 12 49 3 12305 0 0 16 16 0 0 16 1 17 15 0 15 1 49 3 12305 0 9 13 11 0 7 6 4 18 11 1 3 3 52 3 10609 0 11 17 25 11 3 15 27 15 4 17 2 15 53 3 12905 0 35 10 37 14 18 18 18 26 9 43 5 3 52 3 10709 0 1 8 8 11 0 5 7 4 7 11 3 5 40 3 13005 0 18 4 14 12 9 7 5 17 7 21 4 2 45 3 11009 0 8 8 13 9 5 7 14 8 6 8 5 5 55 3 11109 0 8 15 9 15 5 6 10 14 6 16 3 5 35 3 13105 0 29 5 23 12 8 11 14 22 6 28 4 6 52 3 10106 0 28 6 16 14 10 14 22 11 6 24 5 11 57 3 11209 0 11 9 14 5 7 8 16 6 8 12 7 9 60 3 10406 0 21 4 8 14 7 7 12 13 7 16 6 6 51 3 11309 0 17 12 22 15 7 11 20 19 12 18 9 11 53 3 11409 0 14 19 20 13 6 14 21 14 9 20 4 14 49 3 10506 0 12 5 10 14 3 7 10 11 8 13 6 7 48 3 10606 0 8 3 2 3 3 2 2 8 1 5 1 1 41 3 11709 0 12 18 15 22 8 9 22 17 15 12 11 14 48 3 10606 0 18 6 18 13 9 11 11 16 8 21 5 7 50 3 11809 0 19 18 27 18 12 13 20 19 22 21 13 13 54 3 10706 0 0 1 2 3 0 0 0 2 2 2 0 0 33 3 11909 0 18 20 24 18 12 10 15 22 20 23 11 12 48 3 12009 0 15 21 28 13 9 15 16 21 17 25 4 9 49 3 10706 0 12 9 15 10 4 6 10 10 8 15 6 7 51 3 10806 0 16 15 7 12 10 4 9 10 14 16 12 6 46 3 12109 0 16 25 24 18 11 13 20 18 21 23 12 14 49 3 11106 0 2 0 4 4 1 2 2 5 1 2 1 2 45 3 12409 0 12 22 18 9 9 8 16 14 17 14 11 8 52 3 11106 0 10 10 15 13 6 11 18 4 8 18 4 9 53 3 12509 0 12 10 18 9 10 10 9 13 14 14 7 6 54 3 12609 0 20 15 18 17 10 11 15 21 18 15 11 9 51 3 11306 0 2 5 3 1 0 2 2 0 6 2 3 1 62 3 11406 0 1 2 2 0 0 1 0 3 3 1 1 0 50 3 12709 0 11 10 14 21 7 6 13 15 12 16 6 8 45 3 11406 0 11 11 11 10 5 9 15 4 12 11 6 8 58 3 12809 0 14 12 11 17 10 8 10 18 11 17 4 5 42 3 11506 0 3 2 4 1 2 3 6 2 3 1 1 1 73 3 10110 0 18 19 18 21 12 6 14 13 21 25 13 9 48 3 10210 0 23 21 14 18 10 6 19 22 17 17 10 6 48 3 11506 0 10 10 14 12 4 9 18 7 8 12 6 10 55 3 11806 0 8 4 3 8 4 3 5 6 5 6 3 2 47 3 10310 0 17 11 10 16 9 6 6 19 11 15 5 3 42 3 11806 0 9 10 11 8 5 7 14 5 10 9 7 7 58 3 10410 0 15 16 9 18 8 6 15 19 15 11 8 8 46 3 11906 0 6 7 6 7 0 3 11 3 4 6 4 7 54 3 10510 0 23 17 13 23 13 6 12 23 23 17 13 8 47 3 10810 0 20 9 14 16 20 14 13 17 14 15 14 13 52 3 12006 0 9 7 8 9 5 3 9 4 9 13 6 4 51 3 12006 0 1 3 0 1 0 0 1 0 2 1 2 0 44 3 10910 0 12 14 10 20 12 10 16 12 18 12 18 16 49 3 12106 0 10 10 9 10 6 7 10 9 10 11 4 3 49 3 11010 0 21 11 4 24 21 4 16 16 15 15 15 16 46 3 12206 0 12 8 8 7 5 3 5 9 8 11 4 1 49 3 11110 0 30 9 4 20 30 4 20 11 9 22 9 20 50 3 11210 0 23 8 3 34 23 3 21 10 14 24 14 21 45 3 12506 0 7 20 5 14 4 3 16 8 7 13 5 7 39 3 12606 0 20 7 18 15 11 12 18 11 14 16 11 9 59 3 11510 0 37 4 2 27 37 2 24 7 7 30 7 24 51 3 12706 0 7 12 11 14 5 8 16 7 6 14 4 9 46 3 11610 0 23 5 11 26 23 11 20 10 8 31 8 20 46 3 11710 0 23 6 12 20 23 12 14 15 16 13 16 14 55 3 12806 0 13 8 14 8 8 9 10 6 6 19 4 3 51 3 12906 0 6 11 7 11 2 4 11 9 5 10 1 4 41 3 11810 0 19 6 11 20 19 11 12 11 19 12 19 12 55 3 10207 0 17 11 10 7 5 5 11 12 10 14 7 6 52 3 11910 0 14 12 14 17 14 14 13 13 17 12 17 13 52 3 10307 0 7 9 10 18 5 4 6 5 16 17 5 5 44 3 13010 0 26 8 10 20 6 6 17 21 17 10 10 9 54 3 13110 0 18 13 17 19 6 11 19 23 7 17 5 9 46 3 10407 0 10 9 9 11 6 6 9 10 10 14 4 4 46 3 10507 0 15 8 12 6 10 6 8 9 7 15 5 2 52 3 10111 0 16 17 16 27 8 7 25 16 20 15 15 16 51 3 10607 0 12 11 17 18 9 11 10 14 11 22 5 7 43 3 10211 0 17 17 12 14 9 8 13 15 11 19 7 7 45 3 10907 0 3 7 4 4 3 4 3 4 3 9 1 1 35 3 10511 0 9 12 11 11 4 3 6 9 17 12 7 3 49 3 10611 0 14 12 9 17 7 6 10 18 14 12 6 5 44 3 11007 0 6 5 2 3 2 2 7 1 2 4 0 1 57 3 11107 0 8 4 8 11 5 5 6 5 8 12 3 4 48 3 10711 0 10 9 6 19 7 1 6 11 13 11 4 1 41 3 11207 0 12 17 10 11 4 2 9 18 9 15 7 2 40 3 10811 0 14 9 14 13 8 7 8 16 11 16 4 3 47 3 11307 0 14 6 12 10 8 7 9 10 12 9 7 4 57 3 10911 0 14 14 11 23 6 6 10 21 21 9 9 8 46 3 11211 0 13 6 8 14 4 4 11 16 5 10 3 5 45 3 11607 0 14 15 3 7 5 2 7 12 7 14 5 4 39 3 11707 0 19 6 15 17 11 9 17 7 19 16 11 10 60 3 11311 0 20 16 18 19 13 9 20 19 18 18 13 9 51 3 11807 0 22 20 14 17 10 6 19 18 11 25 9 6 45 3 11411 0 18 20 26 16 6 17 26 21 13 22 6 14 51 3 11907 0 12 18 17 14 8 9 11 21 11 17 7 7 42 6s ITI, FR 5 3 11511 0 20 20 36 20 15 14 22 22 28 25 12 12 55 3 11907 0 15 11 17 12 6 7 13 15 13 14 8 8 53 3 12007 0 17 10 21 18 12 15 13 19 17 17 7 10 52 3 12011 0 14 28 23 23 9 13 24 28 20 16 11 16 46 3 12307 0 10 12 18 19 7 8 15 14 16 15 7 9 50 3 12111 0 22 30 23 19 13 12 17 26 19 30 8 8 44 3 12407 0 20 16 18 13 10 10 16 20 16 17 9 7 51 3 12211 0 22 21 17 24 10 9 20 21 25 20 9 10 49 3 12311 0 26 11 24 32 15 13 20 22 22 26 13 14 50 3 12507 0 19 28 16 13 10 9 14 15 24 20 10 8 49 3 12607 0 24 12 24 17 12 13 15 22 19 21 7 8 53 3 12711 0 21 23 19 21 12 10 21 20 18 27 11 10 46 3 13007 0 4 1 3 8 2 1 3 4 6 2 5 1 52 3 12811 0 19 6 16 22 8 11 19 17 13 14 7 11 53 3 12911 0 16 19 20 19 8 11 20 16 16 23 9 12 48 3 13107 0 6 3 11 9 4 5 10 9 8 4 4 6 58 3 10108 0 13 5 9 12 8 6 8 13 11 7 6 4 53 3 13011 0 13 13 20 14 7 11 15 17 11 14 5 8 50 3 10208 0 11 3 9 9 8 4 6 10 9 6 6 5 56 3 10412 0 14 18 12 12 7 9 26 10 11 12 7 10 55 3 10308 0 11 8 12 13 7 6 9 14 7 15 6 4 44 3 11012 0 9 6 11 9 7 8 11 6 8 9 5 7 57 3 11112 0 9 5 11 7 1 5 14 4 8 4 6 10 68 3 10608 0 9 3 5 3 5 4 4 5 7 2 5 3 66 3 10708 0 11 13 7 10 6 4 7 11 10 10 3 3 44 3 11212 0 10 16 20 16 4 10 19 16 7 19 5 9 46 Matching to Sample, Still versus Flicker, 0 second delay and some Simultaneous Presentation and Differential Reinforcement. Possums: 3=Maggie, 5=Emma, 6=Benny, 7=Bonnie, 8=Xanth, 9=Vela, 10=Holly. All sessions 3600 seconds. Pos=possum, Del=Delay, L=Left, R=Right, cor=correct, inc=incorrect, Rft=reinforcement, %=Percent correct. Still Flicker Still Flicker Pos Date Del Lco LincRcor RincLRft RRft Lcor LincRcoRincLRftRRft % PosDate Del Lco LincRcoRincLRft RRf Lco LincRcoRincLRft RRf % 3 22308 0 20 2 14 0 9 8 18 6 7 3 4 5 84 5 12706 0 24 47 18 37 8 14 36 24 26 38 14 16 42 3 22608 0 24 1 20 0 13 11 17 5 20 4 13 9 89 5 12806 0 30 27 33 27 15 22 40 22 25 30 13 20 55 3 22708 0 29 7 21 6 13 15 31 6 22 3 13 18 82 5 12906 0 36 28 39 26 19 20 45 28 33 26 16 20 59 3 22808 0 15 3 19 2 6 8 20 1 16 4 8 13 88 5 10207 0 30 22 20 35 16 13 34 21 36 17 20 18 56 5 10307 0 34 21 26 38 17 14 24 31 31 31 17 15 49 3 23008 0 33 8 22 3 14 14 26 5 28 7 14 13 83 3 20209 0 21 1 27 8 11 16 28 3 21 4 12 17 86 5 10407 0 37 24 27 35 19 10 21 35 36 28 22 13 50 3 20409 0 24 2 29 3 16 12 18 5 30 4 12 9 88 5 10507 0 29 30 33 27 17 12 34 24 30 33 18 15 52 3 20609 0 24 0 16 1 15 9 15 3 22 1 14 7 94 5 10607 0 33 22 22 24 17 8 25 19 33 25 21 10 56 5 10907 0 35 18 29 30 19 23 27 28 27 30 10 15 53 3 21009 0 24 3 27 3 13 15 26 4 24 5 13 14 87 3 21209 0 26 0 27 3 19 15 26 2 25 4 12 12 92 5 11007 0 35 16 35 38 18 16 28 33 28 34 17 17 51 3 21609 0 14 1 23 4 7 8 15 5 17 7 8 10 80 5 11107 0 32 24 22 38 16 14 28 32 24 34 17 14 45 3 21709 0 24 3 31 4 15 14 28 3 20 8 12 13 85 5 11207 0 45 20 26 25 21 19 32 29 27 28 13 13 56 5 11207 0 31 16 27 37 14 15 31 19 25 34 14 14 52 3 21809 0 35 0 21 1 18 13 25 2 30 0 18 10 97 3 21909 0 31 3 28 5 13 14 29 3 36 2 15 16 91 5 11307 0 42 34 27 22 18 17 43 33 18 31 11 9 52 3 22309 0 18 14 24 9 3 11 34 7 23 2 12 19 76 5 11607 0 28 26 22 40 11 7 38 23 28 26 20 18 50 5 11707 0 42 29 26 36 18 16 51 20 31 30 14 12 57 3 22409 0 33 2 25 9 19 12 26 1 37 4 23 15 88 3 22609 0 25 1 19 3 12 12 24 0 22 1 13 15 95 5 11807 0 40 28 21 37 13 13 39 24 28 36 16 18 51 3 23009 0 25 3 31 4 11 15 28 2 26 5 13 15 89 5 11907 0 42 25 30 35 7 16 50 24 28 33 13 21 56 3 20110 0 22 6 15 8 10 7 26 2 21 1 15 13 83 5 11907 0 31 32 31 42 14 14 48 17 33 38 17 15 53 5 12007 0 41 30 39 34 11 15 41 28 27 48 13 14 51 3 20310 0 18 3 20 2 8 11 19 1 20 2 13 13 91 3 20410 0 23 4 25 8 12 13 26 1 29 5 11 13 85 5 12307 0 47 28 23 41 15 11 43 26 29 39 17 14 51 3 20810 0 35 3 23 4 16 14 37 2 27 2 19 16 92 5 12407 0 37 30 34 35 15 20 46 29 24 40 9 16 51 3 20910 0 26 0 29 0 15 15 22 1 29 4 17 15 95 5 12507 0 33 39 39 37 10 16 45 27 30 46 8 15 50 5 12607 0 38 22 30 38 15 18 57 12 17 42 7 11 55 3 21010 0 18 7 17 3 10 10 21 3 21 2 12 14 84 3 21410 0 23 1 28 1 11 16 23 1 23 3 12 17 94 5 12707 0 49 30 35 28 17 16 41 20 34 49 14 11 56 3 21610 0 13 4 16 4 10 7 13 1 13 7 8 6 77 5 12707 0 36 27 43 41 12 18 49 24 35 39 11 14 55 3 21710 0 24 3 25 1 11 14 29 3 16 6 9 13 88 5 13007 0 50 31 28 32 12 18 58 18 23 43 7 16 56 5 13107 0 42 26 34 49 11 14 51 27 29 44 9 16 52 3 21810 0 15 2 16 2 9 10 17 3 14 1 9 11 89 3 22110 0 15 2 13 1 8 10 14 2 13 2 7 9 89 5 10108 0 42 32 32 40 12 13 46 23 34 43 12 13 53 3 22410 0 15 4 8 1 6 4 13 4 11 1 9 5 82 5 10208 0 33 34 17 40 7 6 49 19 31 23 17 14 53 3 22510 0 3 1 13 1 3 8 13 0 4 0 2 4 94 5 10208 0 35 20 20 38 14 8 31 22 29 31 10 6 51 5 10308 0 53 31 23 45 13 4 58 23 38 31 22 13 57 10s ITI, FR 3 5 10608 0 44 27 32 49 15 15 56 26 32 41 12 15 53 5 11705 0 19 14 12 20 19 12 23 7 6 29 6 23 46 5 10708 0 39 35 37 40 12 16 56 17 37 44 10 15 55 5 11805 0 28 2 5 40 19 2 32 5 5 35 3 18 46 5 10808 0 46 18 33 54 10 12 55 31 39 27 20 23 57 5 12105 0 35 8 5 39 21 2 37 0 0 48 0 21 45 5 10908 0 51 36 45 28 16 15 60 20 31 49 10 10 58 5 12205 0 30 4 3 32 4 3 27 7 3 31 3 1 46 5 11008 0 53 37 27 37 17 16 48 21 39 47 13 12 54 5 12205 0 34 13 8 29 3 7 34 7 5 37 4 6 49 5 11308 0 56 22 25 45 12 14 40 31 32 44 13 12 52 5 12305 0 27 8 12 40 7 8 37 3 6 43 6 6 47 5 11408 0 42 29 23 37 10 9 37 29 32 31 19 14 52 5 12305 0 29 13 9 32 6 7 26 9 9 40 7 9 44 5 11508 0 56 15 29 59 16 16 48 31 41 39 12 12 55 5 12405 0 29 13 28 24 12 17 39 7 11 38 7 12 57 5 10409 0 64 20 31 45 22 15 51 34 37 38 24 20 57 5 12505 0 26 26 23 25 13 12 23 21 21 33 14 11 47 5 10509 0 50 22 42 39 28 28 47 28 28 51 19 19 54

Still Flicker PosDate Del LcoLincRcoRinLRfRR LcoLin RcoRinLRfRR % 3 11712 0 6 10 10 10 3 8 15 5 7 11 5 7 51 3 11812 0 7 13 10 9 2 6 15 6 8 11 4 8 51 3 11912 0 10 15 16 6 7 7 11 8 12 16 8 7 52 3 20701 0 4 12 14 4 3 8 10 5 5 14 1 8 49 3 20801 0 6 7 10 3 5 4 6 4 8 9 4 1 57 3 21401 0 3 1 8 3 2 3 3 2 4 3 0 2 67 3 21401 0 15 19 17 17 6 9 21 14 15 17 9 13 50 3 21501 0 10 25 17 7 5 6 14 8 23 3 6 42 3 21601 0 5 3 6 4 4 4 2 4 6 6 3 1 53 3 21601 0 15 18 19 11 7 11 18 12 15 18 8 10 53 3 21701 0 5 2 2 3 1 1 3 5 3 2 1 2 52 3 21701 0 17 16 16 14 12 6 11 14 16 22 14 7 48 3 21801 0 17 15 20 20 8 10 17 20 24 10 8 12 55 3 22101 0 7 6 3 6 1 1 8 6 6 4 5 4 52 3 22201 0 3 2 5 5 2 4 2 5 2 5 1 2 41 3 22401 0 6 8 4 14 4 3 9 8 7 8 4 4 41 3 20503 0 10 18 14 11 5 5 10 13 14 14 8 8 46 3 20603 0 13 12 5 13 9 5 17 6 11 8 6 6 54 3 20703 0 14 10 13 9 7 9 16 7 11 10 7 8 60 3 20803 0 5 11 12 5 3 6 13 4 7 9 4 5 56 3 21103 0 13 6 10 9 8 7 13 4 11 8 6 7 64 Differential Rft - 4s Still, 1s Flicker 3 21203 0 10 13 13 13 6 7 18 7 15 9 6 9 57 3 21303 0 16 8 12 17 10 6 19 7 22 7 12 8 64 3 21503 0 21 13 17 11 9 10 23 9 15 12 8 12 63 3 21903 0 19 17 16 25 11 7 23 20 24 11 13 13 53 3 22003 0 25 5 10 22 14 4 15 11 28 7 16 10 63 3 22103 0 23 4 12 30 11 5 22 9 24 15 14 9 58 3 22203 0 16 7 6 19 10 4 14 7 18 9 10 2 56 3 22503 0 20 5 6 20 12 5 13 6 27 4 13 7 65 3 22603 0 27 17 9 27 12 7 15 20 16 29 10 4 42 3 22703 0 7 6 13 13 4 8 10 13 9 9 3 7 49 3 22803 0 10 12 7 5 4 4 12 7 10 6 6 6 57 3 22903 0 13 8 9 21 8 6 8 17 14 11 9 7 44 3 20304 0 11 11 15 16 4 9 20 12 12 11 6 9 54 3 20404 0 11 13 16 6 4 10 18 12 8 9 5 11 57 3 20504 0 3 8 4 4 1 2 4 5 2 7 2 3 35 3 20504 0 13 6 9 5 7 8 10 5 5 14 5 7 55 3 20804 0 21 7 22 2 15 12 11 14 11 15 8 8 63 3 20904 0 15 4 25 2 7 11 13 8 14 11 4 7 73 3 21004 0 25 7 27 1 12 15 17 18 15 12 9 12 69 3 21104 0 28 8 24 0 15 12 17 7 15 21 12 8 70 3 21204 0 24 8 28 0 12 19 26 12 17 7 9 15 78 3 21504 0 25 11 26 3 15 13 20 15 22 8 15 10 72 3 21604 0 26 6 20 2 15 12 14 12 22 8 12 10 75 3 21704 0 17 1 13 2 11 6 11 5 13 6 9 4 79 3 21804 0 33 5 27 2 16 18 30 9 23 5 16 18 84 3 21904 0 25 5 35 7 11 18 33 6 28 6 14 21 83 3 22204 0 26 6 25 1 18 12 17 10 27 6 15 7 81 3 22304 0 15 1 24 4 10 14 12 10 14 6 5 8 76 3 22404 0 13 3 22 4 9 11 16 8 13 2 5 7 79 3 22504 0 17 4 26 3 12 17 19 7 18 4 11 11 82 3 22604 0 22 2 33 1 16 17 24 6 21 6 11 12 87 3 22904 0 7 0 7 1 4 3 3 3 7 2 3 2 80 3 23004 0 15 0 9 2 11 8 9 0 9 4 4 4 88 3 20105 0 14 3 15 6 6 8 16 2 16 4 10 11 80 3 20205 0 21 1 22 6 9 16 26 5 15 5 8 17 83 3 20305 0 28 0 26 1 14 14 21 5 17 12 9 10 84 3 20605 0 34 4 23 6 17 15 25 14 23 9 14 13 76 3 20705 0 36 0 19 2 14 11 21 12 20 6 16 12 83 3 20805 0 31 2 25 2 14 14 18 13 19 9 11 8 78 3 20905 0 30 1 22 11 14 14 24 8 16 14 9 13 73 3 21005 0 34 0 31 5 21 15 16 4 25 22 16 9 77 3 21305 0 22 1 21 3 9 12 13 7 17 10 9 11 78 3 21405 0 19 0 17 5 8 6 17 2 13 12 10 8 78

Still Flicker Date Del LcoLin RcoRinLRfRR LcoLincRcoRinLRfRR % 3 21505 0 23 0 19 0 10 12 16 5 13 6 8 10 87 3 21605 0 29 0 29 0 10 19 24 8 8 17 6 14 78 3 21705 0 24 0 19 2 15 13 14 3 13 13 6 7 80 3 22005 0 29 2 27 1 17 11 18 7 22 14 15 10 80 Differential Rft swapped - 1s Still, 4s Flicker 3 22105 0 33 1 24 2 17 15 25 5 21 9 13 14 86 3 22205 0 37 1 30 11 18 19 35 6 23 12 12 13 81 3 22405 0 24 6 31 3 16 16 22 15 22 5 11 10 77 3 22705 0 30 5 21 11 14 13 32 5 24 6 17 17 80 3 22805 0 25 5 23 7 12 17 35 1 18 4 10 17 86 3 22905 0 32 6 29 7 20 20 34 5 30 5 19 17 84 3 23005 0 12 2 9 6 6 8 15 1 8 2 4 4 80 3 23105 0 29 4 17 6 13 12 25 3 24 5 12 9 84 3 20306 0 25 1 23 14 15 12 29 1 32 2 17 15 86 3 20406 0 31 10 16 10 17 13 23 10 31 1 18 11 77 3 20506 0 20 5 9 7 11 7 20 3 19 0 14 9 82 3 20606 0 25 10 18 15 15 11 32 1 31 5 21 15 77 3 20706 0 26 5 20 7 12 11 29 1 24 3 12 9 86 3 21006 0 21 3 17 7 10 12 25 1 19 2 11 15 86 3 21106 0 18 2 21 7 9 8 17 1 22 7 8 8 82 3 21206 0 24 7 21 6 16 12 30 2 27 2 19 16 86 3 21306 0 22 5 19 5 10 13 23 2 23 2 11 12 86 3 21406 0 22 8 26 7 14 16 29 1 30 1 17 19 86 3 21806 0 26 8 21 16 13 15 34 1 33 3 13 16 80 3 21906 0 18 5 21 16 12 11 27 0 28 4 14 16 79 3 22006 0 11 2 7 4 5 5 12 0 12 2 8 6 84 3 22106 0 16 7 16 4 8 9 22 0 17 1 9 11 86 3 22406 0 19 8 17 12 11 12 22 0 28 3 12 14 79 3 22506 0 20 18 20 5 12 13 32 0 27 4 16 17 79 3 22606 0 22 8 16 19 12 11 34 1 28 4 12 11 76 3 22706 0 32 8 16 18 13 10 35 4 31 6 15 14 76 3 22806 0 14 6 8 7 7 7 15 0 18 3 7 9 77 3 20107 0 23 15 10 26 11 7 33 3 30 6 19 13 66 3 20207 0 23 12 14 12 12 6 29 0 28 1 19 16 79 3 20307 0 25 8 13 16 12 10 31 1 28 3 13 11 78 3 20407 0 24 6 15 22 12 9 33 4 27 1 17 15 75 3 20507 0 18 6 10 23 9 9 26 3 26 2 14 13 70 Equal Rft - 3s 3 20807 0 30 5 4 26 14 4 20 2 32 11 16 11 66 3 20907 0 16 4 14 8 8 9 25 3 12 1 7 9 81 3 21007 0 24 6 14 16 7 7 28 8 20 4 14 12 72 3 21107 0 22 4 22 3 11 13 19 6 17 8 6 11 79 3 21207 0 31 2 24 4 19 10 20 10 28 4 16 10 84 3 21507 0 20 0 20 1 13 13 18 4 17 1 10 13 93 3 21607 0 9 1 13 1 3 7 12 2 9 1 4 6 90 3 21707 0 8 2 11 1 3 6 9 2 9 1 6 5 86 3 21807 0 10 0 11 0 5 7 6 3 8 2 4 3 88 3 21907 0 10 1 18 4 6 6 13 2 15 4 8 10 84 3 22507 0 18 1 14 3 6 9 15 4 13 1 6 9 87 3 22607 0 25 2 20 1 14 9 23 3 18 4 14 11 90 3 22907 0 25 1 24 0 12 16 25 2 22 3 9 10 94 3 23007 0 23 2 32 2 11 15 28 6 16 7 9 15 85 3 23107 0 25 4 27 0 13 12 24 2 23 4 12 13 91 3 20108 0 28 5 26 5 12 14 26 3 26 9 14 14 83 3 20208 0 22 1 32 4 13 18 33 3 16 8 12 16 87 3 20808 0 2 0 3 1 2 2 4 0 3 1 3 2 86 3 20908 0 2 0 6 1 2 3 4 1 4 3 1 3 76 3 21208 0 8 1 7 0 3 2 7 0 5 3 3 6 87 3 21408 0 17 2 17 4 8 12 20 4 12 3 6 11 84 3 21508 0 17 1 25 3 7 12 23 4 16 4 10 16 87 3 21608 0 19 3 17 6 10 12 26 5 10 6 7 13 78 3 21908 0 16 4 10 4 10 7 15 2 13 4 9 6 79 3 22008 0 14 0 23 2 5 14 21 1 16 2 8 15 94 3 22108 0 16 1 13 0 11 11 9 4 16 3 5 5 87 3 22208 0 13 0 19 3 8 8 14 2 14 6 7 8 85 Pos

Still Flicker PosDate Del LcoLincRcoRinLRfRR LcoLin RcoRinLRfRR % 5 10410 0 51 21 23 44 20 17 73 6 44 15 32 31 69 5 10510 0 55 14 28 33 28 16 53 8 52 15 34 22 73 5 10810 0 45 4 24 28 19 19 54 6 39 5 24 23 79 5 10910 0 55 11 20 24 27 16 49 11 46 4 30 21 77 5 11010 0 47 7 16 32 20 10 42 5 53 7 36 24 76 5 11110 0 40 11 31 24 22 23 55 6 37 5 27 28 78 5 11210 0 44 10 37 21 22 23 46 7 51 9 24 24 79 5 11510 0 37 8 34 26 20 22 46 11 44 5 22 23 76 5 11610 0 51 10 23 22 23 19 48 9 44 5 28 24 78 5 11710 0 45 4 37 17 29 25 38 8 45 10 25 21 81 5 11810 0 50 8 30 20 14 20 56 8 36 9 21 26 79 5 11910 0 45 3 34 19 22 23 50 1 45 9 25 28 84 5 12310 0 41 4 32 33 20 17 43 6 49 8 26 21 76 5 12410 0 42 6 38 21 22 26 51 2 41 14 24 28 80 5 12410 0 37 10 40 17 22 24 44 10 40 13 17 22 76 5 12510 0 45 6 33 22 24 22 39 6 50 12 25 24 78 5 12610 0 50 5 39 9 24 19 48 7 41 8 26 21 86 5 12910 0 42 3 36 15 24 21 43 5 36 10 22 21 83 5 13010 0 45 9 34 18 25 22 49 5 47 6 28 25 82 5 13110 0 44 9 44 15 21 19 49 7 44 12 26 23 81 5 10111 0 49 8 51 9 22 26 51 8 48 11 24 27 85 5 10211 0 43 6 55 12 21 25 51 7 48 11 24 30 85 5 10511 0 45 10 46 11 25 28 55 11 38 8 22 25 82 5 10611 0 51 2 43 20 30 21 40 6 55 13 30 19 82 5 10811 0 51 4 42 10 25 28 48 7 42 10 22 25 86 5 10911 0 49 8 50 10 19 30 64 6 36 13 20 31 84 5 11211 0 46 6 46 15 27 24 47 4 45 19 25 22 81 5 11311 0 50 4 39 19 26 20 45 3 58 7 29 25 85 5 11411 0 53 4 43 13 26 24 50 5 42 16 21 20 83 5 11511 0 43 9 44 12 28 23 48 6 42 11 26 23 82 5 11611 0 39 6 43 14 20 22 46 5 41 10 23 26 83 6s ITI, FR 5 5 12011 0 50 3 40 4 25 24 45 3 44 6 26 25 92 5 12111 0 50 8 49 13 23 18 49 4 55 9 31 28 86 5 12211 0 59 2 38 16 30 21 51 4 47 13 28 21 85 5 12311 0 43 4 44 15 24 24 50 1 50 6 25 27 88 5 12711 0 49 6 39 10 26 24 57 2 40 6 26 24 89 5 12811 0 45 11 51 21 23 26 64 1 50 14 24 27 82 5 12911 0 54 6 42 15 27 23 48 8 48 11 27 23 83 5 13011 0 50 11 39 15 28 26 57 8 44 5 25 21 83 5 10412 0 50 4 35 22 26 23 52 7 46 4 26 25 83 5 11012 0 51 1 47 13 26 27 56 6 44 6 24 23 88

Pos 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5

Date 21903 22003 22103 22203 22503 22603 22703 20304 20404 20504 20804 20904 21004 21104 21204 21504 21604 21704 21804 21904 22204 22304 22404 22504 22604 22904 23004 20105 20205 20305 20605 20705 20805 20905 21005 21305 21405 21505 21605 21705 22005 22105

Still Flicker Del LcoLin RcoRinLRfRR LcoLincRcoRinLRfRR % 0 37 3 50 14 23 28 47 4 47 9 21 28 86 0 40 4 48 9 26 32 42 1 41 16 19 23 85 0 42 7 36 10 24 25 43 3 41 6 26 25 86 0 49 5 41 10 31 23 42 6 48 8 27 19 86 0 51 3 32 3 29 20 36 5 47 5 30 21 91 0 52 4 40 17 22 26 51 8 52 2 25 27 86 0 18 1 16 3 6 7 14 9 16 2 10 10 81 0 41 2 51 8 25 26 53 4 45 2 25 24 92 0 49 8 35 4 25 22 47 5 41 4 27 26 89 0 41 3 49 11 23 29 47 7 42 5 20 28 87 0 49 10 41 4 26 23 45 5 50 7 28 23 88 0 53 6 42 15 27 25 52 6 50 7 25 23 85 0 51 7 33 15 30 22 46 3 47 5 27 21 86 0 50 5 27 15 27 21 40 6 48 4 29 23 85 0 53 3 34 12 30 23 44 7 44 8 27 20 85 0 44 4 49 19 17 24 52 3 45 15 27 32 82 0 51 6 37 10 24 26 46 5 41 13 23 27 84 0 51 9 33 19 30 17 46 3 51 11 34 19 81 0 57 7 37 17 30 24 44 7 51 16 26 20 80 0 48 4 41 12 29 25 40 8 40 16 25 21 81 0 52 2 46 4 27 27 48 7 41 8 22 24 90 0 46 6 44 7 19 29 61 4 31 8 21 31 88 0 49 10 39 11 21 28 60 8 36 3 22 29 85 0 53 6 39 11 24 25 51 7 43 7 25 26 86 0 46 12 47 15 26 25 58 2 45 14 25 24 82 0 56 5 40 20 25 24 55 9 47 7 26 25 83 0 46 4 38 14 25 28 46 10 39 7 23 24 83 0 42 7 50 9 22 29 49 8 37 13 21 28 83 0 53 8 31 10 33 17 35 9 48 12 34 16 81 0 47 4 38 19 25 21 37 10 50 9 29 25 80 0 45 7 42 5 20 20 47 5 40 7 29 31 88 0 48 7 47 12 22 26 54 8 41 10 24 28 84 0 44 8 30 13 28 22 37 7 42 6 28 22 82 0 44 11 40 6 26 24 47 3 39 11 26 24 85 0 44 8 37 8 26 24 51 2 39 7 26 24 87 0 44 8 39 13 24 27 53 6 38 7 23 26 84 0 41 5 41 9 24 28 52 6 32 8 21 27 86 0 45 11 44 20 23 24 58 2 45 12 26 27 81 0 54 10 39 11 25 30 56 10 32 16 21 24 79 0 48 3 45 6 26 32 51 7 33 14 19 23 86 0 44 4 45 7 25 27 36 11 39 12 23 25 83 0 35 12 46 12 24 22 45 2 53 8 29 25 84

Matching to Sam Still versus Flicker, probe sessions at 0 second training. ple, Possum: 3=Maggie, 5=Emma, 6=Benny, 8=Xanth, 9=Vela, 10=Holly. "Normal" i.e. reinforced trials at training delay (0 secs) indicated by delay=100. Each delay on separate line, borders indicate different sessions. Pos=possum, Mon=month, Del=Delay, L=Left, R=Right, cor=correct, inc=incorrect, Rft=Reinforcement,Trl=trials, %=percent correct. All sessions 5400 seconds or 160 trials. Still Flicker Still Flicker Still Flicker PosDate Del LcoLin RcoRinLRfRRLcoLin RcoRinLRfRRTrl Cor% PosDate Del LcoLin RcoRinLRfRRLcoLinc RcoRinLRfRRTrl Cor % PosDate Del LcoLinc RcoRinLRfRRLcoLin RcoRinLRfRRTrl Cor % 3 22908 ## 7 1 3 0 7 3 2 0 7 3 2 7 19 23 83 3 #### 100 9 2 3 3 9 3 7 1 8 2 7 8 27 35 77 5 #### 100 20 1 30 3 20 30 19 2 23 2 19 23 92 ## 92 3 22908 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 100 3 #### 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 4 4 ## 5 #### 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 4 0 2 1 0 0 9 10 90 3 22908 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 2 3 67 3 #### 0.5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 1 3 33 5 #### 0.5 0 1 3 0 0 0 4 1 1 0 0 0 8 10 80 3 22908 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 50 3 #### 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 2 4 50 5 #### 1 0 1 3 1 0 0 2 3 0 0 0 0 5 10 50 3 #### 2 1 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 4 25 5 #### 2 2 1 0 0 0 0 4 0 3 0 0 0 9 10 90 3 22908 2 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 2 3 67 3 22908 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 2 2 100 3 #### 4 1 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 4 ## 5 #### 4 1 2 0 3 0 0 3 1 0 0 0 0 4 10 40 3 22908 8 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 50 3 #### 8 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 ## 5 #### 8 0 2 1 2 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 10 60 3 20309 ## 10 6 17 3 10 17 13 5 16 0 13 16 56 70 80 3 #### 100 5 4 6 1 5 6 8 1 6 0 8 6 25 31 81 5 #### 100 23 0 31 3 23 31 16 2 24 1 16 24 94 ## 94 3 20309 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 0 0 5 7 71 3 #### 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 3 33 5 #### 0 1 1 2 0 0 0 2 0 4 0 0 0 9 10 90 3 #### 0.5 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 3 3 ## 5 #### 0.5 1 0 0 1 0 0 4 0 3 1 0 0 8 10 80 3 20309 1 2 0 0 2 0 0 1 0 0 2 0 0 3 7 43 3 20309 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 2 1 2 0 0 2 7 29 3 #### 1 2 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 2 4 50 5 #### 1 2 1 1 0 0 0 1 2 2 1 0 0 6 10 60 3 20309 2 0 0 2 3 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 4 7 57 3 #### 2 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 4 25 5 #### 2 1 1 3 2 0 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 4 10 40 3 20309 4 1 0 0 2 0 0 3 0 0 1 0 0 4 7 57 3 #### 4 0 0 0 1 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 2 3 67 5 #### 4 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 2 4 0 0 4 10 40 3 20309 8 1 0 0 3 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 2 7 29 3 #### 8 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 4 50 5 #### 8 0 3 0 1 0 0 3 0 3 0 0 0 6 10 60 3 #### 100 6 1 3 1 6 3 7 0 9 4 7 9 25 31 81 5 #### 100 21 0 24 5 21 24 20 0 28 2 20 28 93 ## 93 3 20509 ## 11 6 13 0 11 13 13 4 12 1 13 12 49 60 82 3 20509 0 1 2 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 3 6 50 3 #### 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 2 3 67 5 #### 0 4 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 10 10 ## 3 20509 1 0 0 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 3 0 0 3 6 50 3 #### 0.5 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 4 25 5 #### 0.5 1 1 2 3 0 0 2 0 0 1 0 0 5 10 50 3 20509 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 2 6 33 3 #### 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 3 0 5 #### 1 0 0 2 1 0 0 3 2 2 0 0 0 7 10 70 3 20509 2 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 1 6 17 3 #### 2 2 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 3 67 5 #### 2 2 0 0 1 0 0 4 0 1 2 0 0 7 10 70 3 #### 4 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 3 33 5 #### 4 2 1 0 2 0 0 2 1 1 1 0 0 5 10 50 3 20509 4 1 0 1 2 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 4 6 67 3 20509 8 1 0 1 0 0 0 2 1 0 1 0 0 4 6 67 3 #### 8 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 2 3 67 5 #### 8 0 0 0 4 0 0 4 0 1 1 0 0 5 10 50 3 20909 ## 20 3 12 0 20 12 5 5 20 1 5 20 57 66 86 3 #### 100 4 2 7 0 4 7 6 1 9 0 6 9 26 29 90 5 #### 100 23 3 22 4 23 22 20 1 25 2 20 25 90 ## 90 3 20909 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 2 1 1 0 0 4 7 57 3 #### 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 3 ## 5 #### 0 2 0 3 0 0 0 2 0 3 0 0 0 10 10 ## 3 20909 1 2 1 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 5 6 83 3 #### 0.5 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 2 50 5 #### 0.5 0 0 0 2 0 0 4 0 0 4 0 0 4 10 40 3 20909 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 2 1 0 0 4 6 67 3 #### 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 50 5 #### 1 0 2 3 1 0 0 2 2 0 0 0 0 5 10 50 3 #### 2 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 3 67 5 #### 2 1 0 0 2 0 0 1 2 3 1 0 0 5 10 50 3 20909 2 1 0 3 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 5 7 71 3 20909 4 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 2 6 33 3 #### 4 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 3 67 5 #### 4 1 1 0 5 0 0 2 0 0 1 0 0 3 10 30 3 20909 8 0 2 1 1 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 3 7 43 3 #### 8 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 2 ## 5 #### 8 0 2 1 2 0 0 1 0 3 1 0 0 5 10 50 3 21109 ## 10 0 12 0 10 12 10 1 7 0 10 7 39 40 98 3 21109 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 3 4 75 5 #### 100 18 2 28 2 18 28 23 0 25 2 23 25 94 ## 94 6 #### 100 11 0 21 1 11 21 25 0 13 2 25 13 70 73 96 5 #### 0 4 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 4 0 0 0 10 10 ## 6 #### 0 4 0 1 0 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 8 8 ## 3 21109 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 2 3 67 3 21109 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 1 4 25 5 #### 0.5 2 2 1 1 0 0 1 1 2 0 0 0 6 10 60 6 #### 0.5 0 2 1 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 0 0 4 7 57 3 21109 2 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 4 25 5 #### 1 0 0 3 1 0 0 0 2 2 2 0 0 5 10 50 6 #### 1 1 2 1 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 3 7 43 3 21109 4 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 1 4 25 5 #### 2 0 3 2 0 0 0 0 1 3 1 0 0 5 10 50 6 #### 2 0 1 2 0 0 0 1 3 1 0 0 0 4 8 50 3 21109 8 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 3 33 5 #### 4 1 1 1 3 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 0 5 10 50 6 #### 4 0 1 3 0 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 5 7 71 5 #### 8 3 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 4 0 0 0 9 10 90 6 #### 8 0 2 2 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 4 7 57 3 21309 ## 14 1 5 0 14 5 9 4 10 0 9 10 38 43 88 3 21309 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 3 5 60 5 #### 100 28 0 21 3 28 21 26 3 16 3 26 16 91 ## 91 6 #### 100 22 0 15 1 22 15 19 0 17 2 19 17 73 76 96 3 21309 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 4 5 80 5 #### 0 2 1 1 0 0 0 2 0 3 1 0 0 8 10 80 6 #### 0 2 0 3 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 8 8 ## 3 21309 1 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 2 4 50 5 #### 0.5 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 4 0 0 4 10 40 6 #### 0.5 1 1 0 2 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 3 8 38 3 21309 2 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 5 #### 1 1 2 2 0 0 0 0 3 1 1 0 0 4 10 40 6 #### 1 1 3 0 0 0 0 1 2 1 0 0 0 3 8 38 3 21309 4 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 2 1 0 0 0 2 5 40 5 #### 2 3 1 1 1 0 0 2 1 0 1 0 0 6 10 60 6 #### 2 0 2 1 1 0 0 0 0 3 1 0 0 4 8 50 5 #### 4 0 2 2 0 0 0 2 1 0 3 0 0 4 10 40 6 #### 4 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 1 4 0 0 0 4 7 57 3 21309 8 0 1 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 3 4 75 3 22009 ## 5 2 11 2 5 11 9 3 9 0 9 9 34 41 83 5 #### 8 1 1 0 3 0 0 2 2 1 0 0 0 4 10 40 6 #### 8 1 2 2 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 5 8 63 3 22009 0 2 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 4 5 80 5 #### 100 31 1 11 4 31 11 30 0 19 4 30 19 91 ## 91 6 #### 100 19 0 21 1 19 21 22 0 20 0 22 20 82 83 99 3 22009 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 2 4 50 5 #### 0 3 2 3 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 8 10 80 6 #### 0 1 0 4 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 9 9 ## 3 22009 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 4 4 100 5 #### 0.5 1 0 1 1 0 0 4 0 2 1 0 0 8 10 80 6 #### 0.5 2 1 1 0 0 0 3 0 1 1 0 0 7 9 78 5 #### 1 0 3 3 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 5 10 50 6 #### 1 0 2 2 0 0 0 1 0 3 0 0 0 6 8 75 3 22009 2 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 3 4 75 3 22009 4 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 2 5 40 5 #### 2 1 2 1 2 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 0 4 10 40 6 #### 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 2 1 4 0 0 0 6 8 75 3 22009 8 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 2 4 50 5 #### 4 0 1 2 1 0 0 0 2 4 0 0 0 6 10 60 6 #### 4 0 5 0 1 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 3 22509 ## 19 3 15 0 19 15 16 2 10 0 16 10 60 65 92 5 #### 8 0 3 1 1 0 0 1 1 2 1 0 0 4 10 40 6 #### 8 1 0 1 3 0 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 3 8 38 3 22509 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 3 1 0 0 4 6 67 5 #### 100 20 3 20 9 20 20 24 0 24 0 24 24 88 ## 88 6 #### 100 22 0 22 0 22 22 24 2 25 1 24 25 93 96 97 3 22509 1 1 0 1 2 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 4 7 57 5 #### 0 2 0 3 0 0 0 3 0 2 0 0 0 10 10 ## 6 #### 0 4 0 2 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 0 0 9 10 90 3 22509 1 0 1 2 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 4 6 67 5 #### 0.5 2 1 2 1 0 0 2 2 0 0 0 0 6 10 60 6 #### 0.5 1 3 2 0 0 0 3 1 0 0 0 0 6 10 60 3 22509 2 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 3 1 0 0 4 7 57 5 #### 1 0 2 0 2 0 0 1 2 3 0 0 0 4 10 40 6 #### 1 0 0 2 2 0 0 4 0 1 1 0 0 7 10 70 3 22509 4 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 3 7 43 5 #### 2 0 3 2 0 0 0 1 0 3 1 0 0 6 10 60 6 #### 2 0 5 2 0 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 0 4 10 40 3 22509 8 0 0 1 0 0 0 3 1 1 0 0 0 5 6 83 5 #### 4 0 2 0 1 0 0 1 1 3 2 0 0 4 10 40 6 #### 4 0 2 0 2 0 0 2 2 1 1 0 0 3 10 30 3 22709 ## 5 1 8 0 5 8 11 0 6 1 11 6 30 32 94 5 #### 8 0 0 1 4 0 0 2 0 3 0 0 0 6 10 60 6 #### 8 0 1 3 3 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 4 10 40 5 #### 100 26 2 26 2 26 26 12 2 30 0 12 30 94 ## 94 6 #### 100 21 1 21 1 21 21 21 2 21 0 21 21 84 88 95 3 22709 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 3 3 100 3 22709 1 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 3 33 5 #### 0 2 0 2 0 0 0 3 1 2 0 0 0 9 10 90 6 #### 0 5 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 9 9 ## 3 22709 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 2 3 67 5 #### 0.5 2 0 1 1 0 0 4 0 1 1 0 0 8 10 80 6 #### 0.5 1 1 1 0 0 0 2 0 2 1 0 0 6 8 75 3 22709 2 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 3 67 5 #### 1 0 3 1 1 0 0 0 4 1 0 0 0 2 10 20 6 #### 1 0 1 3 2 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 6 9 67 3 22709 4 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 3 33 5 #### 2 0 1 0 0 0 0 2 3 3 1 0 0 5 10 50 6 #### 2 0 3 1 0 0 0 1 0 3 1 0 0 5 9 56 5 #### 4 2 2 0 1 0 0 2 0 2 1 0 0 6 10 60 6 #### 4 0 3 0 2 0 0 0 2 2 0 0 0 2 9 22 3 22709 8 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 2 3 67 5 #### 8 1 1 1 2 0 0 2 0 2 1 0 0 6 10 60 6 #### 8 1 2 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 2 0 0 4 8 50 Matching to Sam Still versus Flicker, probe sessions at 0 second training. ple, Possum: 3=Maggie, 5=Emma, 6=Benny, 8=Xanth, 9=Vela, 10=Holly. "Normal" i.e. reinforced trials at training delay (0 secs) indicated by delay=100. Each delay on separate line, borders indicate different sessions. Pos=possum, Mon=month, Del=Delay, L=Left, R=Right, cor=correct, inc=incorrect, Rft=Reinforcement,Trl=trials, %=percent correct. All sessions 5400 seconds or 160 trials. Still Flicker Still Flicker Still Flicker PosDate Del LcoLin RcoRinLRfRRLcoLin RcoRinLRfRRTrl Cor% PosDate Del LcoLin RcoRinLRfRRLcoLinc RcoRinLRfRRTrl Cor % PosDate Del LcoLinc RcoRinLRfRRLcoLin RcoRinLRfRRTrl Cor % 8 22108 ## 8 2 19 6 8 19 10 2 16 0 10 16 53 63 84 9 #### 100 15 1 13 2 15 13 13 2 7 1 13 7 48 54 89 10 #### 100 18 2 12 4 18 12 19 2 14 0 19 14 63 71 89 9 #### 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 4 5 80 10 #### 0 2 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 7 7 ## 8 22108 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 1 1 0 0 4 6 67 8 22108 1 0 1 0 2 0 0 2 0 1 1 0 0 3 7 43 9 #### 0.5 2 0 0 1 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 4 5 80 10 #### 0.5 0 1 1 3 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 3 7 43 8 22108 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 3 1 1 0 0 0 4 6 67 9 #### 1 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 5 6 83 10 #### 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 0 4 7 57 8 22108 2 1 3 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 6 17 9 #### 2 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 3 5 60 10 #### 2 0 1 2 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 0 0 3 7 43 8 22108 4 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 0 3 7 43 9 #### 4 0 0 1 0 0 0 2 2 0 0 0 0 3 5 60 10 #### 4 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 5 7 71 8 22108 8 0 2 0 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 0 0 3 6 50 9 #### 8 0 1 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 0 0 0 2 5 40 10 #### 8 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 6 7 86 9 #### 100 13 1 9 3 13 9 13 1 15 2 13 15 50 57 88 10 #### 100 16 1 18 3 16 18 16 0 20 1 16 20 70 75 93 8 22208 ## 14 1 14 0 14 14 19 2 9 0 19 9 56 59 95 8 22208 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 4 0 0 0 6 6 100 9 #### 0 3 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 6 ## 10 #### 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 2 1 1 0 0 0 5 7 71 8 22208 1 1 1 1 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 2 6 33 9 #### 0.5 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 3 1 0 0 4 6 67 10 #### 0.5 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 3 0 0 0 4 7 57 8 22208 1 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 2 6 33 9 #### 1 0 1 2 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 4 5 80 10 #### 1 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 0 4 7 57 8 22208 2 0 4 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 6 17 9 #### 2 2 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 5 5 ## 10 #### 2 0 1 3 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 3 7 43 9 #### 4 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 4 5 80 10 #### 4 0 3 2 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 4 7 57 8 22208 4 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 6 0 8 22208 8 0 1 0 1 0 0 2 1 1 0 0 0 3 6 50 9 #### 8 0 4 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 5 20 10 #### 8 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 2 7 29 8 22908 ## 22 2 11 2 22 11 15 1 19 2 15 19 67 74 91 9 4211 100 18 0 9 3 18 9 13 0 10 2 13 10 50 55 91 10 #### 100 16 1 19 3 16 19 13 3 17 2 13 17 65 74 88 8 22908 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 2 0 3 0 0 0 7 7 100 9 4211 0 3 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 5 5 ## 10 #### 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 0 6 7 86 8 22908 1 0 1 0 3 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 2 7 29 9 4211 0.5 0 1 1 1 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 4 6 67 10 #### 0.5 0 1 1 2 0 0 2 2 0 0 0 0 3 8 38 9 4211 1 0 1 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 3 5 60 10 #### 1 1 1 2 0 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 0 6 8 75 8 22908 1 0 3 0 0 0 0 2 0 3 0 0 0 5 8 63 8 22908 2 0 3 0 0 0 0 1 2 1 0 0 0 2 7 29 9 4211 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 2 1 0 0 3 5 60 10 #### 2 0 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 6 8 75 8 22908 4 0 2 1 1 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 2 7 29 9 4211 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 5 5 ## 10 #### 4 0 1 2 0 0 0 1 2 2 0 0 0 5 8 63 8 22908 8 0 1 1 3 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 2 7 29 9 4211 8 1 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 4 5 80 10 #### 8 0 2 2 0 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 0 5 8 63 8 20309 ## 17 3 17 4 17 17 17 3 17 0 17 17 68 78 87 9 4411 100 8 3 13 5 8 13 18 2 8 2 18 8 47 59 80 10 #### 100 23 0 11 12 23 11 15 1 26 0 15 26 75 88 85 8 20309 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 3 0 3 0 0 0 8 8 100 9 4411 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 3 5 60 10 #### 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 2 0 3 0 0 0 7 8 88 9 4411 0.5 0 0 1 0 0 0 2 0 1 1 0 0 4 5 80 10 #### 0.5 2 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 6 9 67 8 20309 1 1 1 0 2 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 3 7 43 8 20309 1 0 1 2 1 0 0 0 1 3 0 0 0 5 8 63 9 4411 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 5 5 ## 10 #### 1 1 2 2 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 4 8 50 8 20309 2 0 2 0 1 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 4 7 57 9 4411 2 2 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 3 5 60 10 #### 2 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 2 4 0 0 0 4 8 50 8 20309 4 1 1 0 2 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 3 8 38 9 4411 4 0 1 1 2 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 2 6 33 10 #### 4 0 3 3 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 5 8 63 8 20309 8 0 3 0 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 0 0 3 7 43 9 4411 8 2 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 3 5 60 10 #### 8 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 4 3 0 0 0 4 9 44 10 #### 100 6 0 12 2 6 12 7 0 12 0 7 12 37 39 95 8 20509 ## 12 1 11 0 12 11 18 0 16 0 18 16 57 58 98 8 20509 0 3 0 1 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 6 6 100 10 #### 100 23 1 12 5 23 12 23 0 15 5 23 15 73 84 87 10 #### 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 3 3 ## 8 20509 1 0 1 0 3 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 2 6 33 10 #### 0 3 0 1 1 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 7 8 88 10 #### 0.5 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 3 3 ## 8 20509 1 0 2 0 1 0 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 3 6 50 10 #### 0.5 0 1 2 0 0 0 2 1 3 0 0 0 7 9 78 10 #### 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 3 4 75 8 20509 2 0 4 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 6 17 10 #### 1 0 4 2 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 4 8 50 10 #### 2 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 4 ## 10 #### 2 0 0 1 2 0 0 1 0 3 1 0 0 5 8 63 10 #### 4 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 2 3 67 8 20509 4 1 2 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 2 6 33 8 20509 8 1 1 0 2 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 3 6 50 10 #### 4 0 0 1 4 0 0 2 0 0 1 0 0 3 8 38 10 #### 8 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 3 4 75 8 20909 ## 28 1 11 1 28 11 12 0 23 1 12 23 74 77 96 10 #### 8 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 2 1 1 0 0 4 9 44 10 #### 100 20 0 10 7 20 10 10 1 16 3 10 16 56 67 84 8 20909 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 4 0 0 0 8 8 100 10 #### 100 21 1 15 6 21 15 20 1 17 4 20 17 73 85 86 10 #### 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 4 0 1 0 0 0 6 7 86 8 20909 1 1 1 1 2 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 5 8 63 10 #### 0 3 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 2 1 0 0 7 8 88 10 #### 0.5 0 0 0 1 0 0 4 1 1 0 0 0 5 7 71 10 #### 0.5 2 1 0 0 0 0 1 2 3 0 0 0 6 9 67 10 #### 1 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 4 6 67 8 20909 1 0 2 0 3 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 2 7 29 8 20909 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 2 0 4 0 0 0 6 7 86 10 #### 1 0 2 0 3 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 8 13 10 #### 2 0 2 4 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 5 7 71 8 20909 4 0 0 0 4 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 3 7 43 10 #### 2 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 2 1 3 0 0 3 9 33 10 #### 4 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 1 6 17 8 20909 8 0 2 0 2 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 3 7 43 10 #### 4 0 1 4 1 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 7 9 78 10 #### 8 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 4 1 0 0 0 2 6 33 10 #### 8 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 4 1 0 0 0 2 8 25 10 #### 100 11 2 21 4 11 21 16 5 19 1 16 19 67 79 85

Still Flicker PosDate Del LcoLin RcoRinLRfRRLcoLin RcoRinLRfRRTrl Cor % 6 20407 100 21 0 27 1 21 27 21 2 21 1 21 21 90 94 96 6 20407 0 1 0 5 0 0 0 1 0 3 0 0 0 10 10 ## 6 20407 0.5 0 0 3 1 0 0 5 0 1 0 0 0 9 10 90 6 20407 1 2 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 5 0 0 0 9 10 90 6 20407 2 0 3 1 2 0 0 1 0 3 0 0 0 5 10 50 6 20407 4 1 4 1 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 5 9 56 6 20407 8 0 2 1 0 0 0 3 2 1 0 0 0 5 9 56 6 21508 100 21 0 30 0 21 30 16 0 29 2 16 29 96 98 98 6 21508 0 2 0 4 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 9 9 ## 6 21508 0.5 0 1 2 2 0 0 0 0 3 2 0 0 5 10 50 6 21508 1 1 1 3 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 0 0 7 9 78 6 21508 2 1 1 1 0 0 0 2 3 1 0 0 0 5 9 56 6 21508 4 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 3 2 1 0 0 3 9 33 6 21508 8 0 0 1 4 0 0 1 0 2 1 0 0 4 9 44 6 22908 100 9 0 22 0 9 22 9 1 15 1 9 15 55 57 96 6 22908 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 2 0 0 0 4 5 80 6 22908 0.5 0 0 2 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 0 0 5 6 83 6 22908 1 0 1 3 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 5 60 6 22908 2 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 1 5 20 6 22908 4 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 4 5 80 6 22908 8 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 2 2 0 0 0 3 6 50 6 20309 100 26 1 23 1 26 23 17 0 23 3 17 23 89 94 95 6 20309 0 5 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 9 9 ## 6 20309 0.5 0 1 1 2 0 0 4 0 1 0 0 0 6 9 67 6 20309 1 1 1 2 1 0 0 1 1 2 0 0 0 6 9 67 6 20309 2 0 3 0 1 0 0 0 0 5 1 0 0 5 10 50 6 20309 4 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 2 5 0 0 0 6 9 67 6 20309 8 1 0 1 1 0 0 2 1 3 0 0 0 7 9 78 8 22506 8 22506 8 22506 8 22506 8 22506 8 22506 8 22506 8 20407 8 20407 8 20407 8 20407 8 20407 8 20407 8 20407 8 21408 8 21408 8 21408 8 21408 8 21408 8 21408 8 21408 8 21608 8 21608 8 21608 8 21608 8 21608 8 21608 8 21608 8 21908 8 21908 8 21908 8 21908 8 21908 8 21908 8 21908 100 0 0.5 1 2 4 8 100 0 0.5 1 2 4 8 100 0 0.5 1 2 4 8 100 0 0.5 1 2 4 8 100 0 0.5 1 2 4 8 17 1 1 0 2 2 1 7 1 1 1 0 2 2 14 0 0 0 0 2 2 10 0 2 0 0 1 0 16 4 3 0 0 2 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 1 2 0 0 2 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 8 3 0 1 1 0 0 9 1 0 0 0 0 0 13 1 0 0 1 0 0 12 1 0 0 0 1 0 14 2 0 2 2 2 0 1 0 2 4 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 3 1 0 2 0 3 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 2 5 0 1 1 0 0 1 17 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 14 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 0 0 0 16 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 13 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 14 0 0 0 0 0 0 14 1 3 0 0 2 0 9 0 2 0 1 0 0 19 3 3 1 0 0 3 12 1 1 1 1 0 2 19 0 3 3 2 2 1 3 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 2 0 0 1 0 0 0 2 0 1 16 1 0 0 1 0 0 5 2 0 0 0 0 0 7 1 1 0 2 1 0 10 1 1 2 0 0 0 14 1 0 0 1 2 2 0 0 0 0 1 0 4 1 0 0 2 1 1 0 2 0 2 2 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 3 14 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 19 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 19 0 0 0 0 0 0 16 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 0 0 0 14 0 0 0 0 0 0 55 6 4 1 4 4 1 30 4 3 1 1 2 2 53 5 4 1 3 3 5 44 3 4 3 1 2 2 63 7 6 5 5 8 3 61 6 6 6 6 6 6 33 4 4 3 3 3 4 60 6 6 6 6 6 6 48 4 4 5 5 4 5 71 7 8 7 8 8 8 90 ## 67 17 67 67 17 91 ## 75 33 33 67 50 88 83 67 17 50 50 83 92 75 ## 60 20 50 40 89 ## 75 71 63 ## 38

Matching to Sample, Still versus Flicker, 1 second delay . Possums: 5=Emma, 6=Benny, 8=Xanth, 10=Holly. All sessions 3600 seconds. One second delay represented by 100 in delay column. Holly returned to 0 second delay after failure to succeed at 1 second. Pos=possum, Del=Delay, L=Left, R=Right, cor=correct, inc=incorrect, Rft=reinforcement, %=Percent correct. Still Flicker Still Flicker Still Flicker Still Flicker PosDate Del LcoLin RcoRinLRfRR LcoLincRcoRinLRfRR % PosDate Del LcoLin RcoRinLRfRR LcoLin RcoRinLRfRR % PosDate Del LcoLincRcoRinLRfRR LcoLincRcoRinLRf RR % Date Del LcoLincRcoRinLRfRR LcoLin RcoRinLRfRR % 5 20409 ## 27 45 46 23 10 18 36 34 39 34 14 20 52 5 30702 ## 39 26 22 34 13 13 50 12 29 30 26 24 58 5 #### 100 39 23 46 24 24 26 52 12 35 32 23 25 65 #### 100 46 22 41 17 24 24 49 13 42 18 26 26 72 5 20509 ## 36 35 36 31 23 20 48 16 39 32 23 22 58 5 31002 ## 36 20 28 42 16 18 63 7 28 29 21 25 61 5 #### 100 39 23 43 24 24 26 46 18 36 29 24 25 64 #### 100 43 12 38 9 25 27 44 8 38 10 23 25 81 5 31102 ## 39 22 26 40 25 23 48 8 31 40 20 21 57 5 #### 100 48 23 34 23 24 20 47 18 34 30 27 23 63 #### 100 40 11 39 18 27 28 44 6 46 14 23 22 78 5 20609 ## 35 29 22 45 17 16 39 18 31 42 20 17 49 5 20909 ## 41 17 18 50 19 15 32 29 29 35 23 15 48 5 31202 ## 48 25 32 30 21 28 59 13 26 34 19 25 62 5 #### 100 42 22 38 19 20 26 50 16 43 13 22 27 71 #### 100 48 10 45 16 28 27 48 10 38 25 22 23 75 5 31302 ## 43 28 30 31 21 25 60 9 30 32 23 25 62 5 #### 100 40 21 52 21 23 21 42 13 53 24 25 21 70 #### 100 46 6 42 21 22 25 43 17 35 20 21 21 72 5 21009 ## 47 20 25 34 24 18 36 28 21 42 13 8 51 5 21109 ## 27 28 30 36 13 22 34 23 21 40 15 21 47 5 31402 ## 56 21 21 34 25 16 52 13 40 29 26 17 64 5 #### 100 43 16 45 18 22 27 55 17 40 13 23 28 74 #### 100 44 11 41 25 23 20 53 7 53 11 30 27 78 5 21209 ## 34 32 31 24 16 17 35 23 21 46 16 18 49 5 31702 ## 42 19 35 37 21 27 62 6 28 37 21 27 63 5 #### 100 49 12 32 26 25 19 38 13 51 18 31 25 71 #### 100 39 15 44 25 24 27 52 14 39 16 23 26 71 5 31802 ## 36 24 35 39 18 17 59 9 41 23 26 27 64 5 #### 100 47 24 37 24 22 24 44 14 42 33 25 27 64 #### 100 63 10 35 23 23 22 63 11 37 18 28 27 76 5 21309 ## 28 34 43 21 10 23 43 18 19 48 11 23 52 5 21609 ## 28 41 36 24 14 21 39 28 26 38 14 23 50 5 31902 ## 40 17 49 28 22 33 54 13 23 43 16 28 62 5 #### 100 40 16 38 22 27 29 43 12 40 20 22 22 70 #### 100 53 13 41 25 22 26 58 10 33 30 22 24 70 5 32002 ## 47 17 41 25 22 30 53 11 30 36 20 28 66 5 #### 100 39 16 41 24 20 29 41 16 33 34 18 26 63 #### 100 39 9 48 23 15 26 58 9 32 21 21 30 74 5 21709 ## 32 34 30 25 16 17 37 22 30 31 16 19 54 5 32102 ## 50 12 36 35 23 25 52 13 29 40 25 26 63 5 #### 100 46 13 35 17 23 24 50 7 35 19 25 28 75 #### 100 42 12 39 16 23 29 45 9 35 20 20 28 74 5 21809 ## 30 37 38 31 12 22 46 28 25 39 18 25 51 5 21909 ## 34 37 37 20 15 28 38 20 23 47 16 25 52 5 32402 ## 56 20 32 22 22 20 52 13 36 29 25 21 68 5 #### 100 49 29 39 15 21 22 50 16 33 31 24 24 65 #### 100 42 7 43 21 26 31 44 11 32 25 19 24 72 5 22009 ## 28 33 35 34 10 22 46 26 22 34 11 23 51 5 32502 ## 37 26 44 25 20 25 54 14 36 27 22 26 65 5 #### 100 38 15 46 27 22 35 51 19 28 30 14 26 64 #### 100 45 8 40 16 29 27 43 8 40 17 23 21 77 5 32602 ## 54 22 31 22 26 23 50 14 40 27 27 24 67 5 #### 100 51 13 37 24 24 25 47 14 35 29 23 23 68 #### 100 51 14 38 15 26 24 51 11 33 23 25 25 73 5 22309 ## 22 29 39 30 13 27 46 20 16 38 25 13 51 5 22409 ## 15 35 37 33 8 23 42 20 23 35 25 13 49 5 32702 ## 44 12 40 25 23 27 54 6 31 28 22 28 70 5 #### 100 37 19 45 24 19 29 53 20 27 26 15 23 65 #### 100 45 12 54 19 23 25 37 16 38 38 18 20 67 5 32802 ## 40 16 41 28 21 25 59 10 34 23 25 29 69 5 #### 100 49 20 41 12 25 27 39 22 42 21 24 24 70 #### 100 55 12 38 26 25 25 52 10 37 31 26 24 70 5 21710 ## 39 29 28 46 22 18 40 25 33 41 20 16 50 5 30303 ## 50 24 33 27 15 23 57 13 33 30 20 29 65 5 #### 100 45 23 34 24 13 25 54 22 29 21 19 26 64 #### 100 48 7 35 26 22 28 62 11 28 13 22 28 75 5 21810 ## 47 28 36 33 20 21 51 20 31 41 22 24 57 5 22110 ## 42 32 30 30 21 22 37 27 29 43 18 17 51 5 30403 ## 48 19 34 30 23 22 55 6 29 40 23 23 64 5 #### 100 44 15 43 26 26 24 46 22 29 33 22 22 63 #### 100 52 7 39 20 22 28 53 10 41 19 22 28 77 5 30503 ## 51 11 37 33 21 27 56 10 27 40 21 29 65 5 #### 100 43 29 32 27 21 24 54 20 31 27 18 23 61 #### 100 44 7 50 11 21 26 39 10 38 27 24 29 76 5 22210 ## 38 27 27 44 21 19 35 28 25 50 17 16 46 5 30703 ## 45 19 32 36 23 23 61 7 34 31 24 22 65 5 #### 100 46 23 42 21 19 26 46 12 28 46 19 25 61 #### 100 49 12 33 17 23 21 49 9 42 12 29 27 78 5 22410 ## 43 27 26 41 17 17 42 28 29 37 21 20 51 5 22510 ## 29 34 26 48 18 14 31 26 28 54 16 13 41 5 31003 ## 41 29 37 24 15 28 69 16 22 26 17 28 64 5 #### 100 58 20 33 23 20 21 58 15 30 33 23 22 66 #### 100 50 11 49 11 20 28 45 14 46 15 22 28 79 5 31103 ## 45 20 32 31 19 25 54 16 27 31 22 26 62 5 #### 100 54 22 30 26 30 23 54 11 36 32 28 19 66 #### 100 40 13 47 17 16 25 45 15 42 18 20 30 73 5 22810 ## 46 29 20 35 16 17 50 25 28 30 22 24 55 5 31203 ## 48 28 24 34 24 17 51 17 41 23 28 21 62 5 #### 100 39 17 40 27 21 29 59 8 31 26 21 29 68 #### 100 48 16 36 25 26 20 45 11 52 18 28 22 72 5 22910 ## 35 27 34 39 22 24 41 26 26 44 14 16 50 5 23010 ## 30 21 36 43 15 24 35 24 28 43 17 23 50 5 31303 ## 52 17 34 26 26 26 53 17 32 27 25 23 66 5 #### 100 45 17 37 33 20 25 51 13 30 38 15 23 62 #### 100 50 14 35 28 26 23 50 11 39 25 25 23 69 5 31403 ## 44 23 39 28 25 25 52 11 41 28 23 24 66 5 #### 100 55 15 36 29 24 19 60 15 36 27 30 27 68 #### 100 54 12 36 26 22 28 60 13 35 18 22 28 73 5 23110 ## 45 22 29 38 18 22 46 26 24 35 20 22 54 5 20111 ## 40 26 25 31 11 15 37 29 24 31 14 15 52 5 31703 ## 39 12 22 21 21 17 37 10 33 14 19 13 70 5 #### 100 45 10 35 20 27 27 44 15 31 21 24 22 70 #### 100 52 11 36 24 24 26 57 12 33 20 22 24 73 5 31803 ## 48 18 34 26 20 24 50 17 31 29 20 24 64 5 #### 100 59 14 41 20 28 21 47 13 43 34 28 23 70 #### 100 51 14 34 23 24 21 47 8 39 30 24 21 70 5 20411 ## 43 25 25 37 19 20 46 29 36 20 21 19 57 5 31903 ## 34 24 37 36 12 24 56 17 29 29 20 30 60 5 #### 100 45 13 42 16 24 24 54 7 39 17 27 25 77 #### 100 55 11 29 33 22 13 53 9 39 26 30 24 69 5 20511 ## 39 30 32 30 23 19 35 17 38 43 22 18 55 5 20611 ## 39 24 32 36 22 21 46 20 33 32 20 21 57 5 32003 ## 40 10 41 33 24 31 47 16 28 32 19 26 63 5 #### 100 47 22 35 28 20 27 49 14 30 38 19 26 61 #### 100 51 13 37 28 25 25 51 9 38 32 24 25 68 5 20711 ## 43 20 24 43 18 16 40 20 37 34 26 23 55 5 32103 ## 48 16 37 25 18 28 61 12 28 27 21 33 69 5 #### 100 48 20 38 21 25 23 50 11 38 29 27 25 68 #### 100 46 13 41 20 23 25 57 10 30 22 25 27 73 5 32403 ## 42 16 38 26 29 25 52 3 39 26 25 21 71 5 #### 100 56 25 37 21 20 22 67 13 28 29 22 24 68 #### 100 47 19 37 22 23 17 48 11 46 20 29 22 71 5 20811 ## 42 29 23 37 24 19 48 17 32 33 23 22 56 5 21111 ## 47 20 38 28 21 23 39 22 28 45 18 20 57 5 32503 ## 39 11 40 15 21 22 45 5 29 26 18 20 73 5 #### 100 48 16 38 16 27 25 51 11 35 19 25 23 74 #### 100 52 10 32 29 25 23 42 14 44 22 28 24 69 5 32603 ## 43 20 34 21 18 20 55 9 31 24 22 25 69 5 #### 100 44 20 42 18 21 28 58 9 32 23 21 30 72 #### 100 43 13 38 20 26 26 48 11 32 24 24 24 70 5 21211 ## 51 14 22 48 22 17 46 17 32 40 24 21 56 5 32703 ## 65 15 30 23 25 25 55 12 31 33 25 25 69 5 #### 100 43 24 38 30 21 25 55 13 41 23 25 29 66 #### 100 48 8 27 25 27 20 39 6 44 18 31 22 73 5 21311 ## 37 25 24 43 15 20 52 25 25 27 17 20 53 5 21411 ## 45 14 32 43 20 25 53 19 26 37 19 23 58 5 32803 ## 55 16 26 26 24 23 53 10 29 30 25 24 67 5 #### 100 44 17 43 13 23 31 56 9 29 21 19 27 74 #### 100 42 10 34 22 24 26 44 7 39 18 25 25 74 5 33103 ## 36 27 35 29 17 19 55 3 39 29 26 25 65 5 #### 100 29 25 60 13 19 33 55 8 32 29 16 32 70 #### 100 49 11 28 24 27 18 36 8 53 15 32 23 74 5 21511 ## 45 34 19 38 18 16 52 24 28 32 22 18 53 5 30104 ## 41 25 33 35 21 21 50 9 37 36 19 19 61 5 #### 100 35 24 52 17 20 35 62 9 28 30 14 31 69 #### 100 45 13 39 23 29 24 44 15 43 17 26 21 72 5 21811 ## 47 20 36 31 21 25 51 13 22 47 16 22 58 5 21911 ## 54 15 32 29 23 22 40 20 31 38 19 18 61 5 30204 ## 43 10 41 26 21 25 50 11 38 20 25 29 72 5 #### 100 37 15 44 21 17 29 51 2 37 28 21 33 72 #### 100 51 14 32 29 25 25 53 14 43 14 25 25 72 5 22011 ## 39 22 39 37 20 23 43 27 33 33 18 20 56 5 30304 ## 45 18 44 25 25 29 63 14 28 27 19 25 68 5 #### 100 40 23 49 19 17 27 65 9 34 24 22 34 71 #### 100 41 10 32 32 23 21 47 15 35 17 22 20 68 5 22111 ## 50 22 26 35 22 17 54 15 35 32 26 21 61 5 30404 ## 12 11 18 13 5 8 21 4 10 18 6 10 57 5 #### 100 45 8 48 17 21 25 49 7 34 28 24 30 75 #### 100 45 13 39 36 30 21 41 11 52 28 27 18 67 5 22211 ## 46 18 30 41 20 26 54 16 29 36 16 26 59 5 30704 ## 51 11 36 31 26 24 52 11 39 26 25 23 69 5 #### 100 43 20 44 23 20 29 57 6 33 35 18 26 68 #### 100 60 10 27 23 29 21 45 9 53 12 30 20 77 5 30804 ## 49 19 41 21 22 27 66 8 32 24 23 28 72 5 #### 100 43 19 46 14 20 32 58 8 27 28 19 29 72 #### 100 58 9 30 23 33 18 42 15 46 18 31 18 73 5 22511 ## 44 19 24 42 18 19 49 24 29 26 21 21 57 5 30904 ## 53 22 39 23 22 24 58 11 36 35 25 27 67 5 #### 100 35 21 56 18 16 35 63 3 25 38 12 31 69 #### 100 43 11 38 33 25 24 50 12 47 15 25 26 71 5 22611 ## 37 24 30 39 18 20 44 22 30 35 21 20 54 5 22711 ## 39 23 29 40 18 18 33 20 32 45 20 20 51 5 31004 ## 42 18 44 18 22 27 48 12 37 25 23 28 70 5 #### 100 43 27 38 22 24 29 54 3 25 48 20 25 62 #### 100 54 11 30 38 25 13 45 20 55 14 33 22 69 5 31104 ## 46 21 42 30 25 29 51 13 39 37 18 23 64 5 #### 100 44 20 42 32 22 29 64 5 29 42 19 28 64 #### 100 44 13 36 28 24 24 49 15 40 13 26 26 71 5 22911 ## 50 14 28 37 26 15 37 25 32 35 25 13 57 5 31404 ## 46 25 37 26 20 20 46 16 42 31 28 29 64 5 #### 100 44 26 43 20 26 29 63 7 29 32 20 25 68 #### 100 36 15 43 19 19 25 51 5 42 16 24 32 76 5 20212 ## 41 18 21 46 16 14 43 21 28 32 22 23 53 5 20312 ## 44 26 29 33 17 18 49 18 27 38 17 20 56 5 31504 ## 55 14 43 24 22 29 56 17 29 37 20 27 67 5 #### 100 42 36 37 24 17 22 52 17 26 42 16 25 57 #### 100 50 15 39 28 23 20 43 18 48 25 31 26 68 5 20412 ## 46 25 27 31 22 21 53 9 29 39 21 22 60 5 31604 ## 35 21 46 29 16 31 62 9 30 32 17 32 66 5 #### 100 37 21 44 22 20 27 57 9 33 25 24 29 69 #### 100 48 17 42 27 20 26 52 17 39 24 25 29 68 5 20512 ## 37 25 30 39 13 20 51 12 33 38 22 28 57 5 31704 ## 38 17 53 20 23 36 52 14 26 36 14 27 66 5 #### 100 46 28 45 15 21 35 53 14 27 38 16 28 64 #### 100 44 18 39 30 20 21 52 11 37 33 26 28 65 5 32204 ## 44 20 38 30 25 24 58 15 30 30 24 23 64 5 #### 100 33 32 52 19 18 31 48 19 38 33 16 29 62 #### 100 40 20 37 25 19 25 60 16 34 12 24 32 70 5 20612 ## 38 33 23 33 20 17 46 12 35 34 21 17 56 5 32304 ## 41 21 41 24 13 25 60 13 26 29 18 30 66 5 #### 100 45 26 47 18 25 33 63 14 30 28 17 25 68 #### 100 48 19 41 15 26 24 47 13 35 29 26 24 69 5 21012 ## 44 24 29 37 16 18 52 27 24 29 20 24 56 5 21112 ## 37 24 28 37 16 20 44 25 22 36 15 23 52 5 32404 ## 48 25 31 24 25 25 43 8 36 42 23 24 61 5 #### 100 47 16 43 22 29 26 50 10 38 32 23 22 69 #### 100 42 21 42 14 18 24 49 12 37 22 26 32 71 5 32504 ## 49 18 40 26 23 23 56 12 44 25 26 28 70 5 #### 100 45 17 40 20 25 28 55 14 26 24 22 25 69 #### 100 30 13 50 19 17 31 55 6 36 14 19 33 77 5 21212 ## 36 30 31 39 16 20 56 9 42 27 27 32 61 5 32804 ## 32 26 42 30 17 28 65 10 29 25 21 34 65 5 #### 100 36 16 49 19 18 31 55 9 34 24 18 33 72 #### 100 43 16 47 17 17 28 58 18 35 12 23 32 74 5 21312 ## 30 36 22 36 13 17 52 17 28 30 18 23 53 5 21612 ## 38 29 27 39 22 22 52 12 24 43 18 21 53 5 32904 ## 34 25 55 23 15 35 65 6 32 35 13 33 68 5 #### 100 38 13 41 25 20 28 57 10 32 20 21 31 71 #### 100 36 22 50 15 25 29 50 11 35 27 20 26 70 5 33004 ## 48 14 50 16 29 26 42 11 37 37 23 20 69 5 #### 100 44 26 33 33 22 22 56 14 35 33 26 26 61 #### 100 36 10 47 12 24 28 48 2 38 16 22 26 81 5 21712 ## 39 33 31 31 18 24 51 12 31 37 20 21 57 5 30105 ## 43 19 49 26 25 30 51 16 37 32 17 22 66 5 #### 100 40 32 36 30 21 23 42 18 33 45 23 23 55 #### 100 42 20 43 16 20 25 46 15 40 20 20 25 71 5 21812 ## 34 30 25 38 11 13 43 18 28 38 14 19 51 5 21912 ## 38 21 32 37 18 20 51 13 27 37 20 22 58 5 30205 ## 44 16 48 29 24 33 59 17 20 37 16 27 63 5 #### 100 41 9 45 29 19 29 55 11 31 26 21 31 70 #### 100 37 9 48 23 23 33 46 10 33 27 18 26 70 5 30505 ## 51 24 27 29 27 19 53 13 35 33 26 20 63 5 #### 100 39 13 44 17 22 27 57 8 33 17 22 29 76 5 32101 ## 26 25 31 27 15 23 43 21 23 23 14 21 56 5 30605 ## 48 21 38 27 24 21 56 18 37 25 29 25 66 5 #### 100 43 14 45 15 23 24 51 8 38 20 26 27 76 #### 100 13 15 12 20 6 5 19 10 20 12 11 11 53 5 32201 ## 32 17 32 34 16 20 40 6 30 37 20 23 59 5 32301 ## 45 29 20 29 17 18 53 18 31 24 20 19 60 5 30705 ## 37 19 41 22 14 29 49 11 31 29 21 36 66 5 #### 100 38 12 48 10 21 32 43 18 33 15 17 30 75 #### 100 19 13 26 15 14 20 33 3 23 13 12 18 70 5 30805 ## 40 27 45 25 18 26 51 12 38 34 24 31 64 5 #### 100 48 19 36 19 23 22 51 9 48 14 29 26 75 #### 100 23 16 23 13 11 14 33 3 25 14 15 16 69 5 32401 ## 34 25 28 37 16 16 45 13 34 32 22 18 57 5 30905 ## 31 21 48 26 18 32 54 8 30 35 17 33 64 5 #### 100 42 18 47 14 23 24 46 13 44 17 27 26 74 #### 100 24 12 19 14 15 11 28 0 31 8 20 17 75 5 30302 ## 35 20 29 29 17 21 44 15 28 26 15 18 60 5 30402 ## 32 25 28 38 20 16 39 15 39 28 23 18 57 5 31205 ## 50 18 37 29 27 25 51 17 34 29 23 21 65 5 #### 100 44 11 39 15 27 26 43 10 38 15 23 24 76 #### 100 22 13 21 13 10 17 39 3 20 7 13 20 74 5 31305 ## 40 27 35 27 22 26 46 22 32 28 20 22 60 5 #### 100 44 21 37 28 23 22 60 9 45 15 27 28 72 #### 100 35 10 18 17 13 11 34 1 25 21 17 17 70 5 30502 ## 40 22 31 34 18 18 55 13 30 28 19 20 62 Matching to Sample, Still versus Flicker, 1 second delay . Possums: 5=Emma, 6=Benny, 8=Xanth, 10=Holly. All sessions 3600 seconds. One second delay represented by 100 in delay column. Holly returned to 0 second delay after failure to succeed at 1 second. Pos=possum, Del=Delay, L=Left, R=Right, cor=correct, inc=incorrect, Rft=reinforcement, %=Percent correct. Still Flicker Still Flicker Still Flicker Still Flicker PosDate Del LcoLin RcoRinLRfRR LcoLincRcoRinLRfRR % PosDate Del LcoLin RcoRinLRfRR LcoLin RcoRinLRfRR % PosDate Del LcoLincRcoRinLRfRR LcoLincRcoRinLRf RR % Date Del LcoLincRcoRinLRfRR LcoLin RcoRinLRfRR % 6 21312 ## 36 2 22 10 19 18 30 7 21 9 14 13 80 6 #### 100 26 1 30 21 17 17 32 9 28 8 19 20 75 #### 100 26 8 25 11 15 14 31 6 24 9 15 17 76 6 21209 ## 25 5 29 9 10 21 29 6 21 10 5 17 78 6 21309 ## 35 6 19 10 16 15 25 7 25 12 15 13 75 6 21612 ## 31 4 26 13 19 16 31 6 29 8 20 18 79 6 #### 100 32 5 32 12 17 19 35 11 26 8 18 17 78 #### 100 28 5 19 17 16 10 27 7 25 9 20 15 72 6 21609 ## 43 3 25 9 17 12 29 8 27 13 17 14 79 6 21712 ## 38 11 29 15 20 17 35 8 40 10 21 16 76 6 #### 100 28 6 19 10 14 12 25 6 25 6 16 17 78 #### 100 25 6 25 11 13 13 24 8 28 9 17 16 75 6 21812 ## 34 3 26 12 17 21 38 6 23 7 14 17 81 6 #### 100 44 9 31 10 17 19 34 19 23 15 12 14 71 #### 100 35 6 25 7 18 17 27 8 29 7 16 14 81 6 21709 ## 30 5 27 9 14 16 31 11 20 11 16 16 75 6 21809 ## 34 3 21 8 13 14 34 8 19 5 12 16 82 6 21912 ## 40 9 20 11 15 16 34 10 21 14 15 15 72 6 #### 100 38 4 29 5 25 22 28 9 30 9 19 14 82 #### 100 25 4 33 10 12 21 27 7 21 13 10 18 76 6 32101 ## 27 15 20 19 15 12 40 5 30 7 17 16 72 6 #### 100 25 5 27 9 13 16 30 5 26 6 16 18 81 #### 100 23 3 30 12 14 16 29 5 24 8 15 16 79 6 21909 ## 27 3 30 7 13 17 25 5 24 15 14 16 78 6 32201 ## 21 2 25 9 12 15 27 1 22 6 11 15 84 6 #### 100 18 6 14 15 11 8 15 2 28 6 15 10 72 #### 100 25 6 23 13 15 15 30 0 27 9 17 17 79 6 22009 ## 16 3 28 10 6 14 24 6 20 8 10 16 77 6 21106 ## 30 1 25 6 15 14 24 6 22 11 15 14 81 6 32301 ## 16 13 25 23 13 17 36 8 26 7 13 16 67 6 #### 100 33 2 29 9 15 17 34 1 22 12 15 18 83 #### 100 28 6 25 7 16 16 27 3 26 8 18 18 82 6 22409 ## 35 4 21 13 19 14 27 5 32 7 15 19 80 6 32401 ## 34 9 16 21 17 11 29 13 27 11 19 11 66 6 #### 100 28 3 28 13 13 19 35 4 30 7 17 23 82 #### 100 28 6 27 7 16 20 28 4 27 11 12 17 80 6 30302 ## 40 3 24 13 21 17 27 8 31 16 17 11 75 6 #### 100 27 6 31 10 15 15 28 3 33 10 18 19 80 #### 100 31 7 23 10 15 16 29 5 24 11 13 13 76 6 22309 ## 30 1 25 6 15 14 24 6 22 11 15 14 81 6 22409 ## 35 4 21 13 19 14 27 5 32 7 15 19 80 6 30402 ## 39 8 30 15 16 15 32 19 22 18 15 13 67 6 #### 100 36 4 19 5 20 11 21 1 30 12 22 13 83 #### 100 19 8 27 10 9 16 29 5 19 10 12 20 74 6 30502 ## 38 3 14 25 17 9 25 12 37 3 24 15 73 6 #### 100 25 5 16 5 11 7 17 4 16 12 12 11 74 #### 100 30 12 23 7 15 14 34 3 25 10 16 14 78 6 22509 ## 24 2 28 8 15 19 27 3 23 9 11 16 82 6 22609 ## 28 11 26 4 16 14 31 6 20 14 14 12 75 6 30702 ## 35 4 32 13 22 19 28 10 27 18 15 12 73 6 #### 100 32 14 17 17 17 11 26 6 33 15 18 12 68 #### 100 28 4 27 6 17 14 26 3 20 15 18 16 78 6 22709 ## 28 2 18 9 16 14 17 6 20 13 12 10 73 6 31002 ## 45 6 24 11 21 12 35 10 33 8 23 15 80 6 #### 100 39 7 29 7 18 20 36 7 28 10 16 17 81 #### 100 33 7 21 8 16 17 28 6 21 16 14 15 74 6 31102 ## 35 5 30 19 16 17 31 11 31 14 14 16 72 6 #### 100 33 5 36 13 16 24 31 11 26 19 11 18 72 #### 100 22 7 31 13 14 22 31 7 21 15 11 18 71 6 23009 ## 37 3 13 10 18 7 15 7 26 14 20 9 73 6 20110 ## 37 9 17 13 16 12 25 8 25 17 16 12 69 6 31202 ## 34 5 26 11 11 15 33 3 25 13 16 20 79 6 #### 100 26 6 25 22 10 13 30 10 22 17 13 18 65 #### 100 25 14 25 12 11 16 34 5 25 10 16 21 73 6 31302 ## 30 1 25 20 12 12 30 2 30 17 21 22 74 6 #### 100 26 8 31 10 10 17 38 6 19 13 15 24 75 #### 100 22 7 28 9 9 18 27 11 13 14 8 18 69 6 20210 ## 30 3 4 32 15 4 24 9 30 9 20 12 62 6 31402 ## 37 7 18 17 19 11 29 4 27 18 19 12 71 6 #### 100 39 14 21 11 21 14 30 13 26 18 18 11 67 #### 100 21 14 29 12 12 18 32 4 22 19 13 18 68 6 20310 ## 23 7 13 24 11 8 23 11 26 9 20 16 63 6 20410 ## 31 10 10 24 13 6 31 9 29 8 21 12 66 6 31702 ## 31 1 21 16 15 16 30 1 24 13 16 18 77 6 #### 100 30 6 32 10 18 21 30 6 23 17 16 16 75 #### 100 29 6 31 11 11 17 34 7 19 15 10 18 74 6 31802 ## 36 2 20 15 21 15 29 4 30 9 21 16 79 6 #### 100 9 13 12 9 3 6 20 7 16 3 8 8 64 #### 100 25 9 30 7 15 17 26 4 25 13 14 15 76 6 20710 ## 28 7 9 22 17 9 25 9 22 8 16 9 65 6 31902 ## 39 9 28 10 13 13 36 11 27 10 14 14 76 6 #### 100 36 7 29 8 22 16 36 4 31 9 21 16 83 #### 100 22 9 30 8 17 17 32 2 32 7 17 16 82 6 20810 ## 32 13 9 24 19 6 22 14 23 17 17 6 56 6 20910 ## 27 8 9 34 14 8 21 19 24 13 14 7 52 6 32002 ## 33 6 21 15 20 12 27 2 38 6 21 14 80 6 #### 100 27 9 23 15 14 17 36 9 23 8 16 18 73 #### 100 31 13 32 3 13 19 30 20 14 15 11 17 68 6 21010 ## 37 6 6 24 17 4 15 16 32 14 22 7 60 6 32102 ## 28 5 21 18 11 15 30 11 25 7 14 19 72 6 #### 100 37 10 24 11 22 14 23 11 33 15 20 11 71 #### 100 23 9 29 10 11 18 35 5 24 10 14 21 77 6 32402 ## 30 7 26 8 16 17 27 6 22 20 15 16 72 6 #### 100 28 7 26 11 16 15 28 9 27 7 19 17 76 #### 100 29 8 23 14 16 10 25 9 29 10 21 14 72 6 21110 ## 28 5 11 30 16 6 23 15 25 9 17 9 60 6 21410 ## 30 1 13 29 14 11 21 12 26 12 12 11 63 6 32502 ## 30 6 28 14 11 18 33 5 24 17 16 21 73 6 #### 100 31 9 30 11 18 18 29 15 25 12 13 14 71 #### 100 26 8 33 4 11 20 28 11 17 13 11 18 74 6 32602 ## 29 5 29 10 19 17 31 6 25 11 16 15 78 6 #### 100 23 10 25 14 17 18 31 8 27 6 18 18 74 #### 100 29 8 24 6 17 14 23 11 21 10 13 12 73 6 21510 ## 8 3 3 3 3 3 5 2 4 7 3 5 57 6 32702 ## 30 8 23 14 16 14 32 5 22 16 18 15 71 6 #### 100 30 8 34 9 19 19 29 9 31 11 17 16 77 #### 100 28 8 29 6 14 16 30 11 25 6 14 17 78 6 21610 ## 32 3 14 25 13 9 32 7 21 12 15 13 68 6 21710 ## 30 5 15 21 14 15 21 11 18 20 11 11 60 6 32802 ## 33 5 19 15 16 17 38 6 23 9 17 19 76 6 #### 100 31 11 32 9 17 23 36 8 29 8 16 26 78 #### 100 28 12 26 8 15 17 31 7 25 10 14 15 75 6 30303 ## 35 9 28 7 16 20 41 10 21 4 16 17 81 6 #### 100 35 8 25 8 18 18 32 8 23 13 15 18 76 #### 100 28 3 27 6 14 15 24 7 25 11 16 16 79 6 21810 ## 37 5 4 24 14 2 26 2 31 13 25 11 69 6 30403 ## 35 8 23 10 18 16 31 9 29 7 20 18 78 6 #### 100 32 9 24 13 17 16 34 7 22 13 16 16 73 #### 100 27 8 25 7 15 14 26 7 28 9 17 16 77 6 22110 ## 33 4 12 22 23 8 24 4 35 8 24 10 73 6 22210 ## 36 6 11 19 16 10 34 3 21 12 17 12 72 6 30503 ## 24 6 29 11 8 18 31 7 22 10 12 20 76 6 #### 100 31 13 28 10 15 22 39 5 23 17 16 22 73 #### 100 29 3 23 5 19 15 24 4 24 5 18 13 85 6 30603 ## 37 4 24 19 16 13 29 11 34 11 16 15 73 6 #### 100 30 5 34 11 15 24 42 7 14 16 12 21 75 #### 100 25 10 19 10 14 13 27 7 24 6 19 16 74 6 22410 ## 27 4 17 23 11 10 30 5 27 9 17 16 71 6 22510 ## 29 7 15 13 13 9 32 3 22 7 18 14 77 6 30703 ## 30 8 23 13 15 16 28 5 30 10 16 16 76 6 #### 100 34 10 41 10 18 25 38 6 18 29 8 16 70 #### 100 19 7 24 11 13 15 23 5 22 12 14 14 72 6 22810 ## 30 6 15 21 14 9 33 4 33 6 19 13 75 6 31003 ## 28 7 25 10 17 15 34 4 25 8 20 19 79 6 #### 100 31 10 34 5 17 24 38 7 18 16 15 22 76 #### 100 6 8 8 4 3 3 9 4 11 2 5 7 65 6 31103 ## 35 6 30 7 17 18 34 12 24 7 16 15 79 6 #### 100 30 6 35 11 14 22 34 6 24 17 17 22 75 #### 100 24 1 24 15 17 15 23 9 24 8 12 14 74 6 22910 ## 27 4 10 20 16 8 25 1 28 9 21 12 73 6 23010 ## 27 3 16 19 13 10 29 4 26 6 18 13 75 6 31203 ## 32 7 25 9 18 15 32 5 26 8 17 14 80 6 #### 100 27 14 31 9 17 20 31 7 20 23 13 16 67 #### 100 24 4 25 11 12 11 25 2 29 8 18 15 80 6 31303 ## 31 2 22 12 16 15 26 8 25 8 18 18 78 6 #### 100 30 10 38 10 14 23 37 5 27 18 16 24 75 #### 100 27 6 20 16 14 15 30 5 27 9 18 19 74 6 23110 ## 33 7 15 18 10 10 32 3 25 12 16 13 72 6 31403 ## 33 4 26 7 20 17 24 6 27 12 17 14 79 6 #### 100 35 10 26 14 18 18 33 4 18 32 13 12 65 #### 100 26 4 22 22 14 11 23 7 30 14 18 14 68 6 20111 ## 37 2 12 18 13 11 24 5 28 14 18 12 72 6 20411 ## 27 4 20 13 14 15 27 5 26 6 12 16 78 6 31703 ## 31 3 30 12 18 21 34 6 25 13 17 18 78 6 #### 100 31 6 25 19 16 18 32 7 19 22 14 15 66 #### 100 27 6 20 15 15 9 20 3 36 7 19 16 77 6 31803 ## 31 4 29 13 21 18 38 5 27 8 19 18 81 6 #### 100 42 7 29 19 20 16 35 12 27 22 16 11 69 #### 100 25 12 20 12 10 13 30 4 29 8 16 18 74 6 20511 ## 30 4 23 10 12 17 36 4 15 11 11 16 78 6 31903 ## 31 4 18 20 14 12 29 8 24 12 18 16 70 6 #### 100 35 8 27 12 8 19 38 13 18 15 12 23 71 #### 100 23 4 30 6 16 15 22 4 22 13 12 14 78 6 20611 ## 37 2 16 10 19 13 30 6 20 9 16 9 79 6 20711 ## 26 7 18 13 14 12 26 6 26 7 14 14 74 6 32003 ## 37 11 25 6 19 17 38 7 25 9 17 14 79 6 #### 100 30 10 25 11 17 15 29 7 24 18 18 17 70 #### 100 29 13 32 6 16 17 31 15 24 11 12 14 72

Mtc in toS mle S v rs sF k r, 1s c n d la . a h g a p , till e u lic e e o d e y P ssu s: 5 E m, 6 B n y 8 X n , 1 = o . A se n 3 0 se n s. Oese n d la re re n db 1 0ind la co m. Hllyre rn dto0se n d la a rfa retosu e a 1se n . o m = m a = e n , = a th 0 Hlly ll ssio s 6 0 co d n co d e y p se te y 0 e y lu n o tu e co d e y fte ilu cce d t co d P s= o mDl= e y L L ft, R R h co co ct, in in rre R re fo mn %P rce t co ct. o p ssu , e D la , = e = ig t, r= rre c= co ct, ft= in rce e t, = e n rre S till F r licke P s a Dl L inR R R RL inR R R R% o Dte e coL co inL fR coL co inL fR 1 45 01 72 4 9 61 22 21 98 0 23 4 2 9 4 1 4 1 40 01 11 5 91 1 31 1 91 8 0 33 9 4 2 9 5 1 7 1 44 01 31 71 91 41 71 77 0 1 6 5 0 6 5 1 5 1 44 01 61 1 8 72 11 51 1 7 0 2 7 1 3 4 7 3 0 3 1 44 02 1 1 1 81 3 11 5 91 8 0 5 1 2 6 1 0 6 3 1 1 44 01 21 6 51 2 21 2 81 8 0 7 9 6 0 3 5 3 6 1 42 01 11 21 41 11 11 59 0 14 7 1 0 1 9 1 2 1 44 01 42 21 1 2 21 3 91 8 0 14 7 1 0 3 3 7 5 8 1 46 02 21 61 91 32 51 98 0 14 3 6 2 6 3 1 3 1 40 01 31 5 9 41 02 31 78 0 24 4 2 2 1 4 4

M atching to Sam Still versus Flicker, probe sessions at 1 second training. ple, Possum 5=Em 6=Benny, 8=Xanth. "Norm i.e. reinforced trials at training delay (1 secs) indicated bydelay=100. Each delayon separate line, borders indicate different sessions. : ma, al" Pos=possum M , on=m onth, Del=Delay, L=Left, R=Right, cor=correct, inc=incorrect, Rft=Reinforcem ent,Trl=trials, % =percent correct. All sessions 5400 seconds or 160 trials.
Still 5 32406 100 25 5 32406 5 32406 5 32406 5 32406 5 32406 5 30807 5 30807 5 30807 5 30807 5 30807 5 31607 5 31607 5 31607 5 31607 5 31607 5 31807 5 31807 5 31807 5 31807 5 31807 5 32107 5 32107 5 32107 5 32107 5 32107 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 3 1 2 0 0 0 1 2 3 0 1 2 3 1 1 0 1 0 2 0 2 0 1 0 4 1 2 0 0 0 5 32406 0.5 4 14 11 25 14 27 1 3 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 4 3 5 0 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 3 0 5 1 2 2 2 1 1 3 0 1 3 2 1 4 2 2 4 1 3 2 4 4 4 1 4 1 1 3 4 3 4 1 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 3 3 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 1 3 4 0 0 0 0 2 4 0 1 2 2 6 1 1 1 0 0 2 2 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 3 2 0 1 0 1 3 1 1 1 1 0 3 1 4 2 0 0 1 1 4 0 1 0 2 1 0 Flicker 5 13 27 0 1 2 5 0 1 4 2 1 2 1 1 1 3 0 2 0 3 1 0 0 3 3 2 3 2 0 1 4 1 4 1 1 0 2 5 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 0 0 1 2 3 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 71 100 71 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 10 40 4 10 40 7 10 70 8 10 80 3 10 30 2 10 20 9 10 90 7 10 70 9 10 90 5 10 50 4 10 40 4 10 40 8 10 80 8 10 80 7 10 70 6 10 60 3 10 30 8 10 80 7 10 70 7 10 70 8 10 80 6 10 60 6 10 60 8 10 80 6 10 60 7 10 70 5 10 50 7 10 70 5 10 50 6 31906 100 14 6 31906 6 31906 6 31906 6 31906 6 31906 6 32606 6 32606 6 32606 6 32606 6 32606 6 30107 6 30107 6 30107 6 30107 6 30107 6 30207 6 30207 6 30207 6 30207 6 30207 6 30407 6 30407 6 30407 6 30407 6 30407 6 30807 6 30807 6 30807 6 30807 6 30807 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 2 2 3 1 3 3 2 3 0 4 2 0 2 2 4 1 1 1 4 4 0 3 0 4 3 2 5 1 3 1 0 3 0 1 3 3 6 31906 0.5 Still 8 17 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 3 1 0 2 0 0 0 1 2 1 2 0 0 1 1 3 1 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 0 0 2 3 0 4 2 0 1 1 0 2 0 2 0 3 2 2 2 2 0 2 1 2 3 0 1 1 0 2 4 1 2 0 0 3 3 2 0 0 1 7 14 17 20 0 2 0 2 1 0 1 0 1 2 1 3 0 0 1 3 2 1 1 0 0 2 3 0 0 0 1 2 1 1 2 1 0 0 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 2 4 1 1 2 3 4 1 2 2 1 3 4 1 2 0 1 2 0 4 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 2 2 2 2 3 3 0 2 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 3 0 0 0 0 1 2 2 0 0 1 1 0 2 3 0 0 1 0 1 0 Flicker 8 13 20 1 2 1 0 1 0 1 1 2 1 0 2 2 1 2 2 1 4 0 1 0 0 1 1 3 2 1 2 3 1 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 2 3 1 4 1 0 1 0 2 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 1 2 5 2 0 1 1 2 1 1 0 1 3 0 3 3 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 59 92 64 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 90 8 10 80 8 10 80 3 6 5 9 33 9 67 9 56 8 32703 100 10 8 32703 8 32703 8 32703 8 32703 8 32703 8 33103 8 33103 8 33103 8 33103 8 33103 8 30304 8 30304 8 30304 8 30304 8 30304 8 30704 8 30704 8 30704 8 30704 8 30704 8 30804 8 30804 8 30804 8 30804 8 30804 8 31004 8 31004 8 31004 8 31004 8 31004 8 31404 8 31404 8 31404 8 31404 8 31404 8 31604 8 31604 8 31604 8 31604 8 31604 8 32204 8 32204 8 32204 8 32204 8 32204 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 2 0 0 0 1 1 7 0 0 1 1 0 0 6 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 1 0 0 0 4 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 1 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 32703 0.5 3 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 5 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 1 0 0 0 3 2 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 6 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 Still 7 1 2 1 0 1 1 8 1 1 1 0 0 0 7 1 1 1 0 0 0 4 1 2 1 2 0 2 1 1 1 0 0 0 3 1 0 1 0 1 1 9 0 0 0 0 1 0 3 0 0 1 1 0 0 3 2 0 1 0 0 1 4 10 0 0 0 1 1 1 2 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 2 1 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 3 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 13 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 3 0 0 6 2 0 0 0 1 0 9 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 3 3 1 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 1 0 4 0 1 1 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 1 0 0 4 1 1 1 0 0 1 4 0 1 0 0 0 0 Flicker 1 14 0 2 0 0 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 2 1 2 0 1 1 6 0 0 1 0 1 2 6 1 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 2 3 2 1 7 1 0 0 2 1 0 6 1 0 0 1 0 1 7 1 0 1 1 0 0 4 0 0 0 1 1 0 7 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 13 14 44 52 85 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 3 5 3 3 3 3 1 3 1 2 2 3 2 3 3 1 2 6 4 7 5 4 1 2 1 2 2 2 0 2 2 2 1 2 2 2 1 1 2 1 0 1 1 2 2 1 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 6 100 5 60 5 100 5 60 6 50 5 60 3 100 3 33 3 100 3 33 4 50 3 67 3 100 3 67 3 100 3 100 3 33 4 50 7 86 6 67 7 100 7 71 6 67 6 17 2 100 2 50 2 100 2 100 3 67 3 0 Pos D ate D Lcor Linc R R LR R ft Lcor Linc R R LR R ft T C % el cor inc ft R cor inc ft R rl or Pos D ate D Lcor Linc R R LR R ft Lcor Linc R R LR R ft T Cor % el cor inc ft R cor inc ft R rl Pos D ate D Lcor Linc R R LR R ft Lcor Linc R R LR R ft T C % el cor inc ft R cor inc ft R rl or

5 30807 100 21 5 30807 0.5

5 13

8 21 13 23

7 10 13 23 10 67 100 67

6 32606 100 19 6 32606 0.5

2 24

1 19 24 25

7 16 25

7 75 100 75 8 10 80 8 10 80 5 10 50 7 10 70 7 10 70 5 10 50 9 10 90 9 10 90 9 10 90 5 10 50 4 10 40 7 10 70 8 10 80 8 10 80 4 10 40 5 10 50 3 10 30 6 10 60 9 10 90 8 10 80 7 10 70 5 10 50 8 10 80 4 10 40 5 10 50 9 10 90 6 10 60 4 3 6 9 44 9 33 9 67

8 33103 100 8 33103 0.5

6 27 32 84

5 31607 100 12 5 31607 0.5

9 17

9 12 17 31

0 14

8 31 14 74 100 74

6 30107 100 26 6 30107 0.5

2 16

5 26 16 21

6 10 14 21 10 73 100 73

8 30304 100 8 30304 0.5

6 28 36 78

5 31807 100 22 12 11 5 31807 0.5

6 22 11 18

8 19 18

8 59 100 59 0 10 10 100

6 30207 100 23 6 30207 0.5

9 12 23

9 24

8 19 24

8 64 100 64

8 30704 100 16 8 30704 0.5

4 14

1 16 14 15

0 20

0 15 20 65 70 93

5 32107 100 21 5 32107 0.5

5 10 10 21 10 21

2 10 21 21 10 62 100 62

6 30407 100 25 6 30407 0.5

5 12

5 25 12 25

5 21 25

5 67 100 67

8 30804 100 8 30804 0.5

7 17 20 85

6 30807 100 23 6 31006 100 22 6 31006 6 31006 6 31006 6 31006 6 31006 6 31206 6 31206 6 31206 6 31206 6 31206 6 31606 6 31606 6 31606 6 31606 6 31606 6 31806 6 31806 6 31806 6 31806 6 31806 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 3 1 3 2 4 1 3 3 1 1 2 2 3 2 2 1 3 1 2 6 3 0 1 2 6 31006 0.5 3 15 0 0 0 3 1 1 0 0 0 3 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 1 2 1 2 2 3 0 3 1 2 0 0 1 1 1 0 1 1 4 3 1 2 1 1 1 6 22 15 22 0 0 1 1 0 2 0 0 0 1 3 3 1 0 1 2 1 2 0 0 0 1 0 2 Still Pos 8 #### 100 8 #### 8 #### 8 #### 8 #### 8 #### 0 1 2 4 8 8 #### 0.5 6 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 4 1 1 1 3 2 1 4 0 3 0 3 5 4 2 2 2 2 1 2 3 3 1 0 16 15 22 16 75 99 76 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 1 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 2 0 0 0 1 3 2 2 3 0 0 0 0 2 3 0 2 0 0 2 0 2 0 0 0 1 1 2 2 0 0 0 1 2 1 0 3 0 0 2 2 1 3 0 1 0 2 3 1 2 0 0 2 1 1 Flicker 5 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 22 25 88 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 2 1 3 1 2 50 2 100 3 67 2 50 3 100 2 50 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 10 100 0 0 0 0 0 9 10 90 6 8 9 67 9 89 5 10 50 4 10 40 8 31803 100 12 8 31803 8 31803 8 31803 8 31803 8 31803 8 32003 8 32003 8 32003 8 32003 8 32003 8 32503 8 32503 8 32503 8 32503 8 32503 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 2 2 3 1 0 2 1 0 0 0 1 3 1 0 3 0 0 1 8 31803 0.5 6 30807 0.5

2 12 11 23 12 19

8 22 19

8 62 100 62

8 31004 100 8 31004 0.5

6 17 23 74 2 100 2 100 2 100 2 50 3 67 2 100 2 100 1 100 2 50 2 100 1 100 1 0

8 31404 100 1 12 0 0 0 0 1 2 2 0 0 0 0 3 0 4 0 0 0 0 2 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 9 0 2 2 0 1 1 2 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 12 12 14 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 2 0 3 1 0 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 2 1 0 1 2 1 2 2 1 2 6 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 10 1 0 0 0 2 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 2 1 2 0 1 1 0 2 0 0 1 5 1 2 0 1 1 0 1 14 10 48 52 92 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 5 5 6 1 3 5 4 6 2 2 5 3 3 3 2 1 2 6 83 6 83 5 100 6 100 5 20 5 60 7 71 7 57 6 100 6 33 6 33 6 83 3 100 3 100 3 100 3 67 3 33 3 67 8 31404 0.5

7 19 20 95

6 31206 100 21 6 31206 0.5

4 17

8 21 17 19

3 17 11 19 17 74 100 74 0 10 10 100 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 10 80 7 10 70 3 10 30 5 10 50 3 10 30 9 10 90 8 10 80 8 10 80 4 10 40 6 10 60 7 10 70 8 10 80 9 10 90 9 10 90 6 10 60 5 10 50 4 10 40

8 31604 100 8 31604 0.5

4 14 22 64 3 33 2 50 2 100 2 100 3 33 3 67 3 67 3 67 3 67 2 50 3 33 2 50

6 31606 100 16 10 18 6 31606 0.5

7 16 18 18

4 17 10 18 17 69 100 69

8 32003 100 15 8 32003 0.5

5 15

9 11

0 11

7 11 11 46 60 77

8 32204 100 8 32204 0.5

7 20 26 77

6 31806 100 19 6 31806 0.5

3 23

5 19 23 27

8 13 27

8 77 100 77

8 32503 100 8 32503 0.5

5 16 26 62

D D Lcor Linc R R LR R ft Lcor Linc R R LR R ft T C % ate el cor inc ft R cor inc ft R rl or

M tchin toS p S vers sF a g am le, till u licker, 2se ddelayan probesat 2seco d train con d nd elay ing. P ssum 6= en , 8= an A sessions360 seconds. Tw se delayrepresen b 200ind colum E chp delayonseparateline, b o s: B ny X th. ll 0 o cond ted y elay n. a robe ordersind different sessio icate ns. P s=po , D l=D lay L o ssum e e , =Left, R ight, cor= ct, in =R corre c=incorre R ct, ft=reinforcem t, % P en = ercent correct, Trl=Tria ls.
S till 6 461 20 2 2 1 2 1 20 0 5 2 3 5 0 6 471 20 2 1 1 2 1 20 0 1 3 2 7 2 6 481 20 2 1 1 2 1 20 0 2 2 0 5 0 6 491 20 2 1 20 0 2 2 6 401 20 1 30 0 2 4 6 2 1 7 3 3 1 8 3 F r licke 7 3 1 2 1 1 1 6 4 5 5 8 2 0 9 2 9 4 2 4 3 1 1 7 2 9 9 2 7 3 2 3 7 2 9 7 3 1 8 2 9 8 2 6 8 2 8 6 1 3 8 2 4 6 2 1 1 3 0 2 2 3 7 2 2 6 2 0 9 5 4 6 6 6 45 20 2 5 0 3 45 20 2 6 0 0 45 20 2 7 0 1 S till 2 1 5 4 1 8 1 1 6 6 1 1 2 3 1 2 8 1 1 1 1 3 8 6 1 4 8 1 8 7 2 1 6 2 4 9 1 6 F r licke 4 1 1 0 0 1 2 0 5 2 7 9 1 8 1 1 9 3 2 0 3 1 8 6 2 3 3 2 0 5 1 9 3 1 3 2 1 8 3 1 4 2 2 1 3 2 0 6 1 8 3 1 8 5 6 4 2 3 5 1 2 0 2 0 2 2 0 1 1 3 6 1 7 3 1 7 0 8 3 1 7 1 2 1 7 1 6 4 1 9 1 2 0 6 1 6 4 2 3 4 2 0 5 2 3 8 2 1 5 2 2 6 2 1 4 1 6 4 1 8 6 2 3 4 1 3 7 1 1 9 1 7 1 6 S till 8 462 20 2 1 3 1 1 1 3 10 0 6 3 2 1 8 8 3 8 472 20 1 10 0 4 8 482 20 2 10 0 0 9 1 2 2 1 3 8 5 7 9 5 1 6 9 1 8 F r licke 4 2 1 1 1 7 8 7 7 8 3 3 1 1 4 0 2 1 4 5 3 5 5 2 6 5 2 0 4 2 0 4 1 4 8 1 5 2 2 0 8 1 7 5 2 0 3 1 9 3 1 9 2 1 8 3 1 9 1 1 0 9 8 6 5 6 1 1 8 1 1 1 4 1 1 8 9 2 0 8 1 1 7 2 4 7 9 1 0 5 5 9 7 4 4 1 1 8 2 2 0 9 1 8 8 0 8 1 7 0 5 6 60 20 2 14 0 2 6 60 14 6 60 14 6 60 14 6 60 14 6 60 14 6 67 14 6 67 14 6 67 14 6 67 14 6 67 14 6 62 24 6 62 24 6 62 24 6 62 24 6 62 24 S till 6 51 20 2 24 0 3 6 51 24 6 51 24 6 51 24 6 51 24 6 51 24 6 54 24 6 54 24 6 54 24 6 54 24 6 54 24 6 56 24 6 56 24 6 56 24 6 56 24 6 56 24 6 51 34 6 51 34 6 51 34 6 51 34 6 51 34 8 461 20 1 20 0 2 8 471 20 1 20 0 2 2 2 1 8 4 1 1 3 2 1 0 7 5 5 6 1 7 6 3 6 5 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 8 1 1 5 1 6 1 1 0 8 9 2 1 1 64 2 64 2 64 2 64 2 64 2 64 4 64 4 64 4 64 4 64 4 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 2 1 4 1 1 1 2 1 0 3 1 3 1 4 1 1 2 2 2 0 1 5 3 4 1 2 1 0 1 3 2 0 3 3 3 4 6 51 0 2 4 .5 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 4 1 1 0 0 0 0 1 2 1 0 0 0 2 1 1 1 1 0 2 4 2 2 1 0 8 1 1 1 0 0 0 8 2 1 1 2 0 0 8 2 3 0 0 2 1 1 5 1 1 0 1 2 2 0 1 1 1 0 3 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 1 3 1 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 1 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 2 2 0 2 3 1 2 1 2 2 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 0 0 4 0 0 1 3 1 1 0 2 2 0 1 1 F r licke 2 1 4 2 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 2 0 0 1 1 4 1 0 0 2 2 3 1 0 0 1 2 2 0 0 0 3 0 3 1 0 0 3 2 2 1 0 0 2 1 1 5 7 8 .4 6 4 7 0 1 0 1 0 0 2 1 0 0 1 1 4 0 0 0 0 2 3 1 2 0 1 0 1 0 0 3 0 1 2 1 0 2 0 1 2 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5 5 4 5 3 1 6 7 6 6 2 5 7 7 6 4 4 3 6 7 7 7 4 8 5 3 6 4 2 4 7 5 8 6 4 5 7 7 .4 1 7 7 .4 1 6 6 .7 6 7 7 .4 1 6 5 0 7 1 .3 4 7 8 .7 5 8 8 .5 7 7 8 .7 5 8 7 5 8 2 5 7 7 .4 1 7 10 0 8 8 .5 7 7 8 .7 5 7 5 .1 7 7 5 .1 7 7 4 .9 2 8 7 5 8 8 .5 7 8 8 .5 7 8 8 .5 7 9 4 .4 4 8 10 0 6 8 .3 3 6 5 0 6 10 0 6 6 .7 6 7 2 .6 8 6 6 .7 6 8 8 .5 7 7 7 .4 1 8 10 0 7 8 .7 5 8 5 0 7 7 .4 1 6 64 24 6 64 24 6 64 24 6 64 24 6 64 24 6 69 24 6 69 24 6 69 24 6 69 24 6 69 24 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 0 1 2 4 8 2 2 2 2 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 3 0 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 0 3 0 1 1 2 3 0 3 0 6 60 0 1 4 .5 S till 1 1 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 2 1 1 2 0 0 1 0 4 1 0 0 1 2 2 1 0 0 2 1 3 1 0 0 1 2 2 2 0 0 4 2 1 2 2 2 2 0 0 1 0 3 2 0 0 0 1 4 2 1 0 1 2 2 1 0 0 0 0 2 1 0 1 0 0 1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 2 2 1 0 2 4 2 2 1 3 2 0 3 1 1 2 2 3 1 1 1 3 1 1 1 4 2 2 4 2 0 1 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 F r licke 6 2 2 1 0 1 0 2 2 0 1 0 0 2 3 1 0 0 0 0 2 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 6 2 2 0 0 0 1 2 3 0 0 0 0 2 0 1 0 0 1 3 3 1 0 0 1 2 2 2 2 0 0 1 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 6 7 80 2 7 .5 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 6 8 6 6 3 2 6 7 8 5 2 6 5 6 7 3 2 4 6 7 4 6 2 4 4 5 6 7 5 2 8 7 5 8 10 0 8 7 5 8 7 5 8 3 .5 7 7 2 .6 8 7 8 .7 5 7 10 0 8 10 0 7 7 .4 1 8 2 5 8 7 5 7 7 .4 1 7 8 .7 5 8 8 .5 7 8 3 .5 7 7 2 .6 8 8 5 0 7 8 .7 5 7 10 0 7 5 .1 7 7 8 .7 5 7 2 .6 8 7 5 .1 7 7 5 .1 7 8 6 .5 2 7 8 .7 5 7 10 0 7 7 .4 1 7 2 .6 8 P s D te D l L r L c R r R c L ft R ft L r L c R r R c L ft R ft % o a e co in co in R R co in co in R R 8 3 1 1 1 5 0 1 6 1 8 6 1 1 6 5 2 3 7 1 9 6 5 9 6 0 8 5 3 9 6 5 P s D te D l L r L c R r R c L ft R ft L r L c R r R c L ft R ft % o a e co in co in R R co in co in R R 3 1 1 1 1 7 7 1 1 1 4 4 1 1 8 4 0 6 6 1 1 7 7 2 3 4 1 1 6 6 0 7 2 1 1 8 1 1 6 6 1 1 8 2 0 1 2 1 1 8 1 1 3 2 1 1 7 3 1 9 4 1 1 8 3 2 3 4 1 1 8 1 0 0 3 1 0 8 8 2 P s D te D l L r L c R r R c L ft R ft L r L c R r R c L ft R ft % o a e co in co in R R co in co in R R P s D te D l L r L c R r R c L ft R ft L r L c R r R c L ft R ft T C r % o a e co in co in R R co in co in R R rl o

6 40 20 2 1 15 0 9 0 6 41 20 2 15 0 1 6 42 20 2 15 0 2 6 43 20 1 15 0 9 6 44 20 2 15 0 3 6 47 20 2 15 0 0 6 48 20 2 15 0 5 6 49 20 2 15 0 2 6 40 20 2 25 0 0 6 45 20 1 25 0 7 6 47 20 1 25 0 9 6 48 20 2 25 0 0 6 6 6 6 6 46 20 1 1 0 8 46 20 2 3 0 0 46 20 1 7 0 9 46 20 2 8 0 0 46 20 2 9 0 0 4

8 2 1 0 2 9 1 1 9 3 8 1 4

7 2 1 2 1 1 1 6 4 0 2 0 5 0 2

8 492 20 2 1 1 10 0 2 3 9 8 432 20 2 1 2 20 0 9 1 3 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 43 20 2 1 2 1 0 2 3 6 43 20 1 2 0 6 43 20 1 3 0 8 43 20 2 4 0 1 43 20 1 5 0 5 43 20 2 8 0 1 43 20 1 9 0 5 5 2 1 3 1 7 8 2 0 2 1 9 6 2 3 3 1 9 5 1 7 3 2 4 3 1 4 6 1 4 2 1 4

8 1 1 2 3 2 4 9 2 1 2 0 2 6 4 1 1 2 6 5 8 6 1 1 1 1 2 4 8 4 6 8 1 9 8 1 3 4 0

7 2 1 1 1 7 2 0 5 2 0

3 1 1 1 6 7 0 0 1 5 0 1 6 3 1 3 3 1 9 3 1 5 3 1 8 1 2 3 3 2 2 1 2 7 3 2 1 1 2 6 5 1 9 1 2 7

6 422 20 2 1 1 2 1 00 0 8 7 1 5 4 6 432 20 1 1 1 2 00 0 3 6 7 0 6 452 20 3 00 0 0 6 492 20 1 00 0 6 6 412 20 2 10 0 4 6 422 20 2 10 0 3 6 462 20 2 10 0 1 6 472 20 3 10 0 0 6 482 20 2 10 0 1 6 492 20 2 10 0 2 6 6 442 20 2 1 1 1 1 00 0 2 1 4 6 5 3 2 1 2 3 9 9 1 2 1 0 6 0 9 9 1 1 5 2

4 3 1 1 7 1 7

5 1 3 0 2

4 1 2 6 4 0 4 6 1 1 6 9 0 8 5 2 1 7 1 3 2 7 1 1 6 6 4 4 4 1 1 6 6 3 6 4 1 1 7 8 3 1 7 1 1 6 2 0 7 8 6 7 7 6 7 6 1 1 6 3 4 9 7 1 9 5 1 1 6 7 2 3 9 1 1 7 1 1 0 8 1 1 6 2 3 8 8 1 6 6 4 3 1 1 6 5 2 7 8 1 1 7 4 4 2 5 1 6 3 1 6 6 1 2 5 3 8 6 4 8 6 2 7 1 1 6 2 5 3

9 1 1 1 5 0 7 6 1 1 1 2 0 9 9 2 4 7 1 1 2 1 1 4 6 1 1 1 5 1 6 7 1 1 2 1 2 7 5 1 1 1 0 4 6 6 8 1 2 3 3 3 1 1 2 3 8 0 4 1 1 2 3 4 3 3 9 1 2 2 0 8 2 0 5 1 2

6 67 20 1 14 0 9 6 67 0 1 4 .5

1 1 2

3 1 1 1 9 2 6

3 1 6

3 1 1 6 7 8 .3 6 6 3 3 6

3 1 1 1 4 2 0

7 1 1 1 2 4 6 3 7 1 2 2 2

6 402 20 2 1 1 1 10 0 0 7 2 6

1 2 1 1 3 0 0

8 1 1 2 9 1 0

4 1 1 7 2 1 6 3 1 1 8 1 2 5 4 1 1 8 5 3 5 4 3 9 6 7 5 8 1 8 5 3 6 8 5 9 8 0 9 8 6

8 1 1 1 7 6 4

8 2 1 2 0 0 4

8 40 20 2 13 0 9 8 41 20 1 13 0 6 8 42 20 1 13 0 3 8 46 20 1 13 0 9 8 47 20 1 13 0 7 8 48 20 1 13 0 2

1 1 1 2 3 0 4 9 1 1 1 0 0 5 7 3 1 2 3 3 4 1 9 9 2 1 2 1 1 2 3 1 6 5 1 1 6 1 1 3

6 432 20 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 10 0 4 0 6 2 5 0 9 7 9 1 1 7 7

6 2 1 1 4 3 5

5 1 1 1 1 7 8 0 0 2 8 7 1 1 8 0 3 2 6 1 8 2 1 9 1 8 1 1 8 3 1 1 5 2

5 1 1 1 1 2 1 2 9 7 2 4 3 0 1 5 1 1 2 9 1 6 6 2 1 2 3 3 3 9 2 5 7 2 2 9 2 7 5 1 2 1 3 3 2 9

6 62 20 1 24 0 9 6 62 0 2 4 .5

2 1 5

4 1 1 2 9 5 1

1 1 3

3 2 1 6 7 8 .2 1 3 8 8 7

8 45 20 2 1 2 13 0 1 0 5

8 1 1 8 2 4 0 2 1 2 3 1 1 3 5

5 2 1 1 1 2 0 4 5 4 0

5 1 1 1 1 7 5 2 0 3 9 9 1 1 7 3 1 9 6 1 1 8 0 0 7 7 1 1 7 2 1 5 8 1 1 7 1 3 6 1 6 2 4 7 3 6 8 8 8 8 8 4 1 5 7 1 6

6 402 20 2 1 1 1 20 0 6 4 2 2 6 432 20 1 1 2 2 20 0 7 0 2 1 6 6 6 6 6 6 6

4 1 1 0 8

9 1 3 1 1 1 4 2 0 8 0 4 2 0

3 1 1 2 0 3 1 8 1 2 0 5 8 1 2 0 0 2 5 9 8 1 7

43 20 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 0 2 1 6 9 4 0 3 2 0 43 20 2 1 1 1 1 1 3 2 0 4 4 5 0 6 4 2 43 20 2 1 1 3 0 3 2 5 43 20 1 4 0 5 43 20 5 0 1 43 20 2 8 0 2 4 4 9 1 4 8 0 9 8 0 7 1 6 1 1 9 7 7 1 1 6 0 9 1 6 9 9 2 2 1 5 2 1 2

6 41 20 2 16 0 5 6 44 20 1 16 0 8 6 45 20 16 0 9 6 46 20 3 16 0 0 6 48 20 2 16 0 1 6 41 20 1 26 0 9 6 43 20 2 26 0 3 6 45 20 1 26 0 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 47 20 2 1 0 0 47 20 2 2 0 5 47 20 2 5 0 2 47 20 2 6 0 0 47 20 7 0 6 47 20 2 8 0 1 47 20 1 9 0 9

4 1 1 8 1 1 1 1 8 2 5 8 1 2 1 4 2 1 8 2 2 2 2 1 7 0 2 9 1 2 6 1 1 8 3 2 5 1 2 2 2 8 2 2 1 4 1 6 2 2 2 4 1 6 1 2 4 5 2 4 5 2 0 2 1 3 4 1 7 4 1 6

P b S sio s ro e es n
P s D te D l L r L c R r R c L ft R ft L r L c R r R c L ft R ft T C r % o a e co in co in R R co in co in R R rl o

6 64 20 1 24 0 5 6 64 0 2 4 .5

3 2 0

0 1 2 1 5 0 1

4 1 5

3 1 1 6 7 8 .9 1 5 1 1 5

8 2 1 1 1 2 5 9 2 1 8 1 6 7 2 1 7 1 6

2 1 9

5 1 1 2 0 3 3 1 1 1 1 6 0 5 6 9 7 2 4 4 1 1 2 0 7 2 3 1 1 2 0 5 9 5 1 1 2 1 0 3 3 4 7 9 8 1 2 3 4 6 9 4 7 3 1 1 2 1 2 0 9 2 3

6 1 8 0 0

8 1 1 1 1 6 9 1 1 1 8 6 2 1 1 2 6 5 4 2 1 8 2 1 1 6 2 2 7 6 1 1 9 2 4 2 0 2 2 6 7 2 0 7 2 3 1 2 6 5 2 6 8 1 7 9 2 3 6 2 9 8 2 6 8 2 1 5 2 4 7 1 6 8 2 4 7 2 4 5 3 2 7 1 1 7 5 3 2 6 1 5 0 8 5 1 6 4 8

43 20 2 1 1 1 1 9 0 6 1 1 0 3 9 1 1 1 7 8 2 5 2 1 4 6 7 1 1 8 2

2 1 1 8 3 2 8 7 1 8 1 3 8 1 8 1 9 6 1 7 3 9 6 5 7 4 6

6 40 20 1 13 0 7 6 41 20 1 13 0 7 6 42 20 2 13 0 0 6 45 20 1 13 0 6 6 46 20 1 13 0 7 6 47 20 1 13 0 7 6 49 20 2 13 0 2 6 43 20 1 23 0 9 6 44 20 2 23 0 5 6 45 20 2 23 0 1 6 46 20 2 23 0 9 6 40 20 2 33 0 3 6 6 6 6 6 6 44 20 2 1 0 3 44 20 2 5 0 1 44 20 2 6 0 2 44 20 2 7 0 4 44 20 2 8 0 1

1 1 1 4 2

6 69 20 2 24 0 0 6 69 0 2 4 .5

0 1 4

3 2 1 1 0 4 6

1 1 4

7 1 1 6 7 8 .3 6 4 4 5 5

8 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 7 7 1 5 0 9 3 9 1 2 5 4 8 1 2 2 6

4 1 1 8 4 1 4 7 1 1 8 2 1 5 4 7 1 1 8 1 6 1 8 1 1 7 1 3 8 8 7 5 6 8 2 9 7 5 3 1 1 8 2 0 5 9 1 1 8 2 1 5 2 1 1 6 1 4 8 8 1 8 8 0

6 1 1 1 0

6 54 20 2 24 0 1 6 54 0 2 4 .5

6 1 2 0 1

6 1 1

1 1 5

6 1 1 5 7 7 .6 1 5 3 1 4

3 1 1 7 2 5 6 8 1 1 7 3 3 4 7 9 9 6 9 9 7 3 7 8 4

6 2 1 1 1 2 1 5 0 1 3 6 1 1 7 1 2 1 8 4 1 8 8 1 1 0 9 9 2 5 8 1 9 8 1 8

6 48 20 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 13 0 9 0 8 3 1 1 7 6 42 20 2 1 1 1 1 23 0 4 0 0 2 4 5 1 1 1 4 0 4 6 1 1 1 6 0 3

4 2 1 1 1 7 1 1 2 3 1 1 1 5 6 1 4

8 1 2 1 1

6 43 20 2 17 0 6 6 44 20 2 17 0 1 6 45 20 1 17 0 8 6 46 20 2 17 0 2 6 49 20 3 17 0 0 6 40 20 2 27 0 2 6 41 20 2 27 0 5 6 42 20 2 27 0 4 6 43 20 1 27 0 8 6 46 20 2 27 0 3 6 47 20 2 27 0 1 6 48 20 2 27 0 4 6 49 20 2 27 0 4 6 40 20 2 37 0 4 6 48 20 3 2 0 0

2 1 1 2 5 4 3 2 1 1 1 3 2 6 5 1 1 1 0 5 8 1 1 1 2 0 0 3 9 1 1 2 3 1 2 6 1 1 1 2 0 7 7 1 1 1 3 0 9 7 1 3 8 9 2 0 9 2 4 8 2 3 9 1 8 8 2 2

5 1 1 1 7 2 3 5 1 1 2 2 6 0

7 1 1 7 5 1 6 4 1 1 7 1 2 8 8 1 1 6 1 4 1 9 7 7 2 5 7 1 3 6 8 6 1 1 7 6 2 4 6 1 1 7 2 2 1 1 1 1 7 5 1 9 7 1 1 7 2 4 4 5 1 3 4 1 0 9 8 0 8 7 2

8 1 1 2 0

6 56 20 1 24 0 3 6 56 0 2 4 .5

1 1 3

7 1 1 1 3 3 8

2 1 3

3 1 1 5 7 8 .4 8 3 7 0 1

9 1 1 1 1 6 6 8 1 0 8

5 1 1 1 1 2 7 5 1 0 1 8 1 1 1 6 0 5 0 1 0 6 4 7 1 1 1 1 2 5 1 0 2 1 4 1 1 1 3 0 2 9 1 8 4 2 1 9 1 9

6 41 20 1 1 1 33 0 9 0 8 44 20 1 1 1 2 0 5 4 6

7 1 1 7 2 3 8 7 1 1 7 1 3 3 2 1 3 6 1 2 7 9 7 4 8 8 0 6 1 1 7 4 0 4 4 1 1 8 3 0 4 9 1 8 0 5 9 8 4 5 1 3

7 1 2 4 3

3 2 1 0 7

4 1 1 1 1 3 3 3 1 1 1 5 3 1 5 2 0 2 1 6 1 2 4 1 1 9 5 1 0

6 51 20 1 34 0 2 6 51 0 3 4 .5

4 1 8

2 1 1 1 2 8 9

5 1 5

9 1 1 6 8 7 .2 9 5 4 4 6

9 1 2 2 6 9 2 0 5 2 2

4 1 1 1 3 0 7

4 1 1 1 0 0 9 4 1 1 2 3 5 3 5 1 1 1 4 3 7

6 1 1 1 3 3 1 7 1 1 1 3 7 0 7 1 1 6 8 2 6 1 1 4 4 7 1 9 5 1 7 7 1 5 1 1 2 3 2 0 7

6 42 20 2 14 0 6 6 43 20 2 14 0 1 6 45 20 1 14 0 3 6 46 20 2 14 0 2 6 49 20 1 14 0 9 6 40 20 1 24 0 7 6 41 20 2 24 0 3 6 42 20 2 24 0 5 6 43 20 2 24 0 8 6 46 20 1 24 0 7 6 47 20 2 24 0 5 6 48 20 2 24 0 5 6 49 20 2 24 0 2 6 40 20 2 34 0 0 6 6 45 20 1 3 0 7 45 20 1 4 0 8

4 1 1 7 8 2 4 5 9 5 6 8 5 7 8 7 9 8 7 3 9 7 6 8 8 3 8 7 6

9 1 2 1 8 4 1 2 1 2 8 2 2

3 2 1 1 1 7 2 0 4 5 0 7 8 5 1 6 2 1 6 1 8 0 0 9

6 44 20 1 2 3 14 0 2 3 2

7 1 2 2 0 9 5 2 2 1 2 1 3 1 2 3 2 2 2 5 2 0 2 1 4 5 2 4 5 1 4 3 1 7 4 1 8 1 2 0

64 20 1 2 0 4 64 0 2 .5

9 1 4

8 1 0

0 1 3

5 1 1 4 6 7 .8 0 3 5 1 3

2 1 1 1 7 0 2

8 1 3

7 1 1 3 1 2 2 7 1 1 1 2 2 8 7 1 7 9 2 0 8 1 7 7 1 6 6 1 1 6 1 3

8 481 20 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 2 20 0 1 3 4 6 1 1 6 4 1 8 491 20 1 1 1 1 20 0 4 3 0 3 8 401 20 1 1 2 1 30 0 3 6 2 9 8 432 20 1 1 1 00 0 1 3 8 5 6 1 2 0 9 6 1 2 3 2 9 1 2 0 4 9 1 2 2 4 9 1 3 0 1 7 8 1 6 0 3 1 6 3 9 4 1 3 8 3 0 2 2 1 5 2 6 3 2 9 5 2 5 4 1 4

4 1 1 6 0 2 4 8 1 1 6 6 7 9 9 1 2 6 7 3 6 4 8 1 7 5 1 8 1 2 7 3 2 1 8 1 1 6 2 3 9 8 1 1 6 1 3 2 6 1 1 7 6 2 5 5 1 1 6 3 3 5 5 7 8 7 0

3 1 1 4 0

7 2 1 1 1 1 1

2 1 1 1 3 2 2

9 1 5 4 1 4 3 4 1 4

8 1 1 7 5 0 8 9 1 8 1 7

8 422 20 1 2 2 2 1 1 4 00 0 7 6 8 3 1 6 1 8 442 20 2 1 2 1 1 1 3 00 0 3 7 6 4 1 9 6 8 452 20 1 1 1 1 00 0 3 0 7 4 8 492 20 1 2 1 1 00 0 2 0 7 5 8 402 20 2 10 0 4 8 422 20 1 10 0 0 8 432 20 2 10 0 8 8 412 20 1 1 1 1 10 0 5 9 5 7 7 1 3 7

3 1 1 2 0 3 2 9 1 2 1 7

64 20 2 4 0 0 64 0 4 .5

7 2 0

8 1 9

1 1 7

6 1 1 6 7 8 9 7 4 9 1

2 1 1 1 0 3 5 5 1 1 4 2 3 1 5 7 1 9 9 2 8 1 2 2

8 1 1 7 0 3 3 7 1 1 7 0 0 8 9 1 7 1 3 8 1 8 0 2 4

9 1 1 2 2 2 3 8 1 1 2 1 3 4 4 1 1 3 1 5 2 7 9 1 1 2 9

9 1 1 1 1 2 6 2 7 1 3

5 2 1 0 0

7 1 1 8 2 5 3

7 2 1 1 1 2 1 2 1 1 1 6 2 6 4 0 0 1 7 1 5 3 8

Matching to Sam Horizontal versus Vertical, 0 second delay. ple, Possums: 1=Josh, 2=Charlotte, 3=M armite, 5=Putzy, 6=Benny, 7=Bonnie, 8=Gavin, 10=Holly, 12=Cindy, 14=Spock. Pos=possum, M on=month,Del=Delay, L=Left, R=Right, cor=correct, inc=incorrect, LRft=Left Rft, RRft=Right Rft. All sessions 3600 seconds.
H orizontal 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 4 30 4 4 4 4 4 4 9 0 43 11 10 49 15 7 48 Vertical 5 15 46 15 9 51 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 5 5 5 5 5 5 8 9 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 9 9 9 0 13 21 0 12 20 0 8 15 9 27 4 32 9 11 3 6 6 6 2 1 3 0 2 1 0 6 28 13 23 3 24 17 18 4 13 10 11 6 34 7 11 14 52 9 10 10 43 9 9 6 48 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 4 28 4 29 4 30 4 4 0 31 33 35 31 15 21 35 24 20 49 12 17 47 0 28 32 30 41 11 18 48 20 19 43 14 19 48 0 43 30 29 30 16 17 41 17 26 48 15 16 53 0 19 22 20 22 0 25 36 28 29 6 17 31 11 6 34 4 14 46 9 16 47 18 17 40 12 19 49 5 5 5 5 5 4 4 4 4 5 10 6 10 7 10 8 10 H orizontal 0 31 22 24 26 10 17 38 6 Vertical 7 53 4 11 48 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 4 29 4 30 4 4 4 4 9 9 0 0 2 29 28 10 4 14 13 6 4 2 3 9 8 12 23 24 5 8 5 19 11 9 20 29 9 4 7 6 2 8 4 5 9 48 3 43 8 58 6 52 6 52 4 45 7 45 6 46 9 53 6 46 9 55 5 47 5 55 8 61 1 44 8 44 8 48 9 45 5 44 8 47 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 4 4 8 11 9 11 H orizontal Vertical 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 4 23 11 4 24 11 4 25 11 4 26 11 4 29 11 4 30 11 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 1 12 2 12 3 12 6 12 7 12 8 12 9 12 0 20 15 10 25 12 0 21 26 14 18 11 3 18 16 23 16 15 9 50 8 49 6 45 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 6 25 19 22 13 13 12 52 5 21 5 22 5 23 5 24 5 25 5 28 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 2 3 4 7 8 9 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 0 27 0 28 0 40 H orizontal Vertical 5 8 58 Pos Year Day M Del Lcor Linc R R LR R ft Lcor Linc R R LR R ft % on cor inc ft R cor inc ft R 1 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7 10 8 10 0 31 18 14 42 13 10 40 22 22 21 14 11 51 0 30 27 20 39 11 13 35 20 21 42 10 12 45 0 22 37 14 41 13 8 41 14 30 29 18 13 47 0 27 20 18 48 13 11 32 21 23 38 13 14 44 0 36 12 18 42 17 11 40 10 20 40 17 11 52 0 38 10 17 52 14 13 43 17 12 45 12 15 47 0 30 22 19 44 11 12 41 15 27 33 19 17 51 0 34 26 18 32 15 14 37 21 22 31 14 12 50 0 44 17 16 40 20 11 37 23 23 36 17 11 51 0 37 17 21 40 19 13 29 20 28 36 18 13 50 0 24 23 17 45 11 11 34 31 23 22 14 17 45 0 26 25 25 36 14 17 35 28 19 31 9 15 47 0 36 20 21 29 17 15 40 27 19 20 14 13 55 0 30 23 25 33 12 19 32 29 16 31 12 17 47 0 32 15 26 38 13 17 39 20 26 26 12 16 55 0 35 23 18 31 19 12 32 21 28 27 20 12 53 0 26 28 19 31 13 14 38 20 26 20 18 19 52 0 32 23 13 43 15 7 25 24 37 25 21 11 48 7 50 0 29 29 27 27 20 14 25 20 32 36 14 Pos Year Day M Del Lcor Linc R R LR R ft Lcor Linc R R LR R ft % on cor inc ft R cor inc ft R 0 52 25 12 35 12 11 39 14 17 52 15 12 49 0 27 38 24 25 18 17 45 20 17 31 15 14 50 0 33 26 25 36 14 14 38 18 19 45 11 13 48 0 34 20 24 38 11 16 43 19 19 34 14 18 52 0 18 23 31 10 10 16 28 15 23 20 13 16 60 0 29 24 27 26 12 18 45 11 13 37 12 20 54 0 31 37 21 28 12 15 42 10 19 47 12 14 48 0 25 27 24 39 12 17 40 12 29 32 15 18 52 0 23 35 30 26 11 21 44 12 19 41 0 21 37 30 35 0 22 42 35 28 9 20 50 0 34 31 36 18 11 20 35 20 19 42 10 16 53 8 14 44 10 28 43 14 19 50 8 23 52 19 8 47 4 16 46 Pos Year Day M Del Lcor Linc R R LR R ft Lcor Linc R R LR R ft % on cor inc ft R cor inc ft R 0 24 18 24 18 14 16 21 19 24 20 11 13 55 0 12 15 17 11 0 4 17 13 11 0 12 22 20 24 0 13 10 20 10 0 7 30 22 15 8 3 5 6 8 18 19 10 4 11 12 16 8 1 7 51 4 38 Pos Year Day M Del Lcor Linc R R LR R ft Lcor Linc R R LR R ft % on cor inc ft R cor inc ft R 8 27 18 12 13 19 23 19 17 7 27 5 12 12 18 16 18 13 6 15 15 12 23 20 27 4 12 12 13 21 18 24 3 6 9 15 24 21 14 16 8 10 23 9 29 12 10 11 20 26 26 18 9 11 69 8 10 64 6 9 6 58 9 60 8 59

4 10 11 4 12 11 4 15 11 4 16 11 4 17 11 4 18 11 4 19 11 4 22 11 4 23 11 4 24 11 4 25 11 4 26 11 4 29 11 4 30 11 4 4 1 12 2 12

8 11 25 20 21 14 10 14 49 9 12 14 15 16 6 6 9 10 11 59 9 20 14 26 13 15 16 51 8 9 15 16 14 5 7 49

0 33 14 30 0 23 12 25 0 29 13 29 0 26 10 33 0 21 10 22

4 11 10 4 12 10 4 13 10 4 14 10 4 15 10 4 18 10 4 19 10 4 20 10 4 21 10 4 22 10 4 26 10 4 27 10 4 28 10 4 4 4 4 4 4 2 11 3 11 4 11 5 11 8 11 9 11

4 15 10 12 16 17 20 11

0 26 21 36 17 15 12 25 24 32 19 14 13 60 0 11 12 18 15 0 24 29 34 11 11 16 19 38 27 13 0 7 27 21 7 4 7 7 13 16 22 9 7 11 53 7 7 52

6 10 66 7 56

4 11 10 4 12 10 4 13 10 4 14 10 4 15 10 4 18 10 4 19 10 4 20 10 4 21 10 4 22 10 4 26 10 4 27 10 4 28 10 4 29 10 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 1 11 2 11 3 11 4 11 5 11 8 11 9 11

6 13 15 10 16 68 9 11 61 4 10 56 7 9 57 6 52

0 24 11 31 13 14 11 13 20 21 26 10 0 23 10 24 11 13 13 18 11 19 22 0 22 8 33 14 11 15 22 26 9 20 0 20 16 32 10 11 11 21 16 16 24 0 22 19 31 11 12 0 21 15 27 20 0 23 19 31 0 27 18 31 0 21 13 36 0 17 0 23 9 10 12 30 27 16

0 23 38 22 20 14 12 32 27 28 20 11 11 50 0 15 29 28 17 8 23 26 23 13 12 17 51 6 12 24 20 15 13 7 50

0 17 32 31 23 10 15 18 39 32 12 12 14 48 0 18 21 21 11 10 0 13 28 36 23 10 15 19 29 31 19 11 14 50 0 21 18 29 24 14 12 14 23 38 19 14 10 55 0 19 20 13 15 6 10 21 18 14 14 7 10 50 0 22 29 27 26 10 12 27 26 31 20 16 16 51

9 14 27 19 21 10

0 28 43 23 21 13 17 43 16 19 38 11 18 49 0 21 28 34 29 11 17 34 21 24 32 14 19 51 0 21 35 28 30 10 11 32 17 35 32 18 17 50 0 17 22 26 19 11 0 14 16 10 13 0 39 28 23 31 5 9 16 23 21 22 13 7 19 6 12 18 7 8 48 7 51

5 10 5 11 5 14 5 15 5 16 5 17 5 18 5 21 5 22 5 23 5 24 5 30

8 10 52 7 60

8 13 10 17 14 26 25 10 8 15 10 11 21 25 28 9 10 12 15 25 17 22 9 16 14 15 20 21 9 11 20 22 19 22 8 5 8

0 24 16 24 11 12 12 20 19 17 21 0 21 12 29 11 12 17 16 24 13 22 9 33 13

7 10 56 3 56 8 53 9 56

7 12 46 26 17 33 12 16 51

0 29 35 19 39 12 13 45 17 16 45 13 13 44 0 38 23 21 31 15 12 41 17 21 37 18 17 53 0 34 22 21 34 16 14 29 22 28 31 18 17 51 0 21 29 26 39 9 17 46 20 23 28 15 20 50 0 36 36 20 23 17 16 44 24 22 24 18 15 53 0 35 27 26 29 20 17 31 14 27 46 14 12 51 0 31 31 23 25 18 12 28 23 19 40 14 11 46 0 21 36 24 38 13 9 30 26 27 35 17 12 43 0 29 24 29 28 18 18 25 28 24 34 12 11 48 0 34 23 20 36 11 17 51 12 29 22 21 26 59 0 31 31 23 34 16 15 36 15 26 39 15 16 49 0 30 21 25 39 14 15 37 20 27 34 15 16 51 0 37 17 29 30 20 13 36 20 31 25 24 20 59 0 37 30 19 30 21 13 29 27 24 39 16 9 46 0 36 19 22 32 17 18 43 17 23 25 20 20 57 0 24 26 27 44 12 17 40 29 25 29 15 20 48 0 31 27 24 38 13 17 43 26 18 33 11 17 48 0 38 25 24 21 15 18 35 18 26 26 17 17 58 0 25 24 28 42 12 19 42 23 24 30 14 20 50 0 31 33 21 31 11 14 33 28 23 33 15 16 46 0 29 30 25 33 12 18 35 19 23 41 13 19 48

0 42 18 14 33 20 11 25 32 29 19 20 10 52 0 31 28 19 37 14 13 22 27 28 37 15 11 44 0 33 19 18 39 12 8 31 21 25 30 19 17 50 0 30 19 24 31 18 16 27 19 31 26 15 13 54 0 22 21 21 42 11 11 29 24 35 19 15 17 50 0 29 19 18 35 15 12 30 18 23 32 17 14 49 0 27 17 0 13 7 8 24 13 3 13 4 4 17 16 25 19 16 2 12 14 7 6 5 6 8 16 13 22 13 13 8 20 17 8 50 4 47 6 54 9 54

6 10 59 7 10 55 8 63 8 56 9 56 6 6

0 19 22 17 17 12 12 20 20 19 18 11 0 21 17 18 23 14 10 15 23 17 24 10 0 18 18 20 19 12 11 21 15 16 21 0 22 22 23 17 0 9 13 16 5 0 17 13 27 17 0 10 25 23 17 0 19 23 25 23 0 15 21 23 15 0 16 23 29 15 0 15 19 21 21 0 25 19 13 0 18 17 27 15 7

0 27 19 25 11 0 28 16 35

9 22 10 14 12 16 16 19 11 10 9 11 16 20 25 16 27 9 12 20 23 23 21

4 10 11 4 11 11 4 12 11 4 15 11 4 16 11 4 17 11 4 18 11 4 19 11 4 22 11 4 23 11 4 24 11 4 25 11 4 26 11 4 29 11 4 30 11 4 4 1 12 2 12

9 12 51

0 22 17 18 14 14 13 15 12 20 23 11 10 53 6 18 21 25 22 15 11 52 8 8 11 7 11 57 6 12 17

0 23 19 30 13

9 11 56

0 16 16 34 11 12 17 20 17 17 23 0 26 0 27 0 51 0 42 0 41 0 46 3 24 0 25 3 41 2 35 1 39 2 28 0 26 24 24 0 27 25 25 0 24 19 43 0 22 23 40 0 20 19 39 0 20 17 44 4 26 1 23 5 46 2 36 0 42 0 33

9 12 20 16 19 21 10 13 55 8 12 55 5 15 45 8 11 50 8 9 54 9 61 6 13 24 21 11 20 9 7 8 7 13 20 17 16 22

4 25 11 4 26 11 4 29 11 4 30 11 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 1 12 2 12 3 12 6 12 7 12 8 12 9 12

0 26 24 93 0 23 25 99 0 23 21 96 0 21 21 97 0 18 17 99 0 22 20 99

4 10 11 4 11 11 4 15 11 4 16 11 4 17 11 4 18 11 4 19 11 4 22 11 4 23 11 4 24 11 4 25 11 4 26 11 4 29 11 4 30 11 4 4 1 12 2 12

0 18 17 14 16 12 0 13 12 17 21

0 20 20 29 17 11 12 27 19 17 21

8 12 19

0 32 21 16 27 14 15 29 26 18 23 13 15 49 0 40 13 21 32 17 12 23 35 26 21 16 11 52 0 32 23 25 24 17 13 24 25 23 33 14 10 50 0 28 19 13 31 15 0 18 13 15 29 9 6 21 18 31 19 20 13 52 8 18 28 21 9 14 13 48

9 20 20 20 29 11 11 47 9 16 27 16 23 10 11 47 6 19 16 20 21 12 12 49 9 11 53 9 10 52

4 10 12 4 13 12 4 14 12 4 15 12 4 16 12 4 17 12 4 21 12 4 22 12 4 23 12 5 5 5 6 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2

0 18 20 24 14 12 16 23 16 16 20

0 19 19 25 15 14 12 17 15 28 19 16 12 57 0 16 27 23 18 10 10 19 21 22 23 10 14 47 0 9 5 18 16 6 10 14 8 15 10 5 10 59 0 13 30 23 18 0 17 22 28 19 0 14 23 25 12 0 18 29 21 14 0 14 18 28 19 7 12 29 12 17 25 12 15 49 8 15 26 16 22 21 11 19 54 9 16 23 25 14 12 9 16 51 9 50 8 48 9 44 7 12 24 26 15 16 10 13 48 9 21 22 22 20 11 8 14 26 16 21 17 10 16 56

0 36 10 23 34 19 18 22 21 28 29 13 12 54 0 35 26 16 27 16 11 28 25 26 24 18 13 51 0 29 14 17 46 14 12 34 23 27 23 15 14 50 0 40 11 14 38 16 10 18 34 24 29 17 11 46 0 36 13 18 29 17 12 25 27 24 20 18 12 54 0 32 19 15 32 12 10 31 24 20 24 15 14 50 0 38 19 17 32 12 9 37 24 23 24 17 16 54 0 41 17 17 27 16 11 25 21 24 33 19 15 52 0 32 11 23 32 15 14 25 23 24 28 15 10 53

7 12 11 28 11 12 12 10 9 11 17 16 20 25

0 16 15 19 15 10 11 18 13 16 18 11 10 53 0 17 17 26 15 11 13 14 22 21 19 0 10 28 26 20 0 18 20 19 23 0 13 19 22 17 0 16 25 22 23 7 8 7 25 17 20 23 10 10 48 9 20 24 20 18 12 11 48 9 10 51 9 16 50

4 10 12 4 13 12 4 14 12 4 15 12 4 17 12 4 21 12 4 22 12 4 23 12 5 5 5 6 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2

0 22 24 20 19 11

8 12 17 12 19 20 7 11 32 21 18 20

0 16 26 26 11 14 14 13 23 22 22 10 0 16 32 22 18 11 11 21 22 18 26 10

1 10 6 10 7 10 8 10

0 10 24 28

5 12 5 13 5 17 5 19 5 20 5 21 5 24 5 25 5 26 5 27 5 28 5 5 5 5 5 5 2 3 4 7 8 9

0 21 39 16 22 10

6 25 21 27 27 14 10 45 9 50

0 14 25 29 14 11 10 18 23 35 0 17 9 14 12 6 9 6 7 8 7 3 4 3 7 4 6 3 2

5 16 11 59

0 16 15 22 22 10 11 27 13 19 16 14 16 56 0 26 18 14 20 15 11 14 18 24 23 12 0 22 15 26 14 12 18 25 22 15 17 0 24 18 17 17 10 0 26 18 17 30 13 0 22 13 6 23 8 7 14 56

0 17 22 14 19 14 10 17 19 24 12 16 13 50 0 18 26 24 25 11 10 21 26 31 16 15 13 50 0 18 22 25 17 10 11 16 27 26 11 12 11 52 0 19 19 28 22 13 14 25 20 27 17 13 17 56 0 19 30 25 17 16 12 23 15 31 20 16 12 54 0 19 25 23 17 14 12 24 20 26 13 14 13 55 0 29 30 19 19 18 11 17 33 24 22 15 0 19 27 25 13 0 14 31 20 18 0 17 21 11 21 10 6 18 13 25 14 12 6 46 9 51 9 48 8 14 26 13 22 23 13 18 55 7 12 22 19 19 22 11 13 45 9 12 18 26 12 13 12 53 5 15 26 27 17 19 13 52

0 14 11 19 18 10 12 19 21 13 10 8 13 20 11 10 0 21 25 21 20 17 10 0 13 18 16 12 0 0 0 0 0 0 8 14 9 18 8 17 18 17 8 24 17 11 8 18 21 11 8 12 9 6 9 5 9 7 12

5 10 5 14 5 15 5 16 5 17 5 18 5 21 5 22 5 23 5 24 5 30

4 11 10 4 12 10 4 13 10 4 14 10 4 15 10 4 18 10 4 19 10 4 20 10 4 21 10 4 22 10 4 26 10 4 28 10 4 29 10 4 4 4 4 1 11 2 11 3 11 5 11

9 35 28 15 11 8 8 7 7 3 2 7 4 6 7 6 5 5

8 16 14 22 24 14 12 52 9 19 19 25 27 12 10 48 4 15 25 15 10 7 3 45 7 52 9 46 9 57 8 49 8 49 5 53 4 49 7 49

0 10 18 13 23 0 11 27 12 30 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 22 17 23 7 37 15 30 0 20 14 12 3 41 17 18 3 28 2 39 8 18 6 16

4 21 14 21 10 12 12 50 8 21 17 13 17 49 9 22 15 6 11 49

5 10 23 14 13 11 5 14 14 15 6 12 17 27 6 7 10

0 22 14 19 17 10 14 22 18 15 18 11 12 54 0 17 19 23 25 12 11 16 22 20 26 11 11 45 0 21 16 14 27 14 0 25 14 13 19 16 0 21 15 16 30 13 0 22 15 16 23 11 0 25 23 19 25 10 0 22 16 16 26 13 0 20 19 21 41 13 0 32 23 16 21 17 0 23 12 12 35 10 0 28 21 23 25 12 0 19 20 20 22 15 8 18 18 22 19 13 10 48 5 16 16 18 18 14 9 15 30 24 16 11

5 13 5 17 5 19 5 20 5 21 5 24 5 25 5 26 5 27 5 28 5 5 5 5 5 5 2 3 4 7 8 9

5 11 20

4 34 11 32 14 14 18 49 8 28 11 32 12 12 18 57 8 18 10 13 5 29 13 31 5 21 4 34 6 24 4 23 3 6 14 50

6 18 23 11 7

0 12 23 23 25 0 10 29 25 23

0 11 24 33 11

8 10 16 23 30 11 9 13 14 20 6 4 5 9 5 8 8 7 7 12 8 8 7

7 12 57

5 12 29 13 30 16 10 18 54 7 15 20 50 8 11 15 48 3 13 18 51

0 19 27 26 18 14 13 18 28 24 22 13 0 17 12 15 21 11 0 31 12 15 26 12 0 11 20 25 23

7 11 10 5 16

8 17 19 27 12 12 11 54 9 24 21 28 20 11 13 52 8 9 24 31 16 14 9 18 5 14 33 45 10 15 5 13 33 36

0 11 0 0 0 0 0

9 13 8 13 9 8 2 7

5 15

0 28 12 18 21 14 10 20 22 24 13 16

0 10 12

6 14 13

0 24 19 22 35 13 10 21 31 30 19 17 16 48 8 10 18 20 24 18 12 11 49 4 19 23 28 20 16 10 45 8 12 33 27 23 14 6 44 6 51 8 45 0 19 32 15 24 12 0 22 25 23 26 14

4 19 10 7 25 25 7 21 13 8 24 13

5 10 13 14

0 13 13 22 13

9 27 14 10 9 26 18 12 8 18 10 8 8

5 10

5 10 5 11 5 14 5 15

8 11 30 27 12 13 10 45 7 13 37 31 16 11 8 10 24 31 17 12

0 27 20 24 31 17 10 14 31 40 18 13 0 32 27 22 30 18 11 17 40 29 24 13

1 10 4 10

8 20 27 13

7 10 18 22 16 13 6 12 17 17

8 11 50

0 23 29 30 33 14 13 29 36 25 23 11 12 47

Matching to Sam Horizontal versus Vertical, 0 second delay (continued). ple, Possums: 1=Josh, 2=Charlotte, 3=M armite, 5=Putzy, 6=Benny, 7=Bonnie, 8=Gavin, 10=Holly, 12=Cindy, 14=Spock. Pos=possum, M on=month,Del=Delay,L=Left, R=Right, cor=correct, inc=incorrect, LRft=Left Rft, RRft=Right Rft. All sessions 3600 seconds.
H orizontal 7 6 6 6 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 5 10 5 16 5 17 5 18 5 11 5 14 5 15 5 16 5 17 5 18 5 21 5 22 5 23 5 24 5 25 5 28 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 2 3 4 7 8 9 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Vertical 10 10 10 10 10 0 25 32 25 31 13 0 23 34 31 24 0 20 30 33 23 0 24 30 38 25 7 23 38 26 26 12 6 44 8 47 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 4 17 11 4 18 11 4 19 11 4 22 11 4 23 11 4 24 11 4 25 11 4 26 11 4 29 11 4 30 11 4 4 1 12 2 12 0 13 20 7 10 8 8 8 6 13 12 14 10 8 20 11 20 7 15 15 10 19 6 11 21 14 17 8 2 5 9 7 47 5 42 7 50 6 49 9 55 8 54 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 12 4 10 12 10 4 13 12 10 4 14 12 10 4 15 12 10 4 16 12 10 4 17 12 10 4 21 12 10 4 22 12 10 4 23 12 10 5 5 5 6 1 10 1 10 1 10 1 10 4 24 5 25 3 36 0 42 3 27 2 33 3 23 5 27 3 31 7 31 5 16 8 24 7 14 5 23 7 29 4 29 0 26 4 33 6 34 4 29 4 40 0 44 0 23 0 33 2 1 2 2 0 2 1 2 2 2 6 3 3 3 25 13 16 3 31 3 12 6 0 8 1 29 3 30 8 34 6 31 8 31 3 32 3 35 2 41 3 16 4 29 4 9 9 44 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 5 13 14 54 1 19 17 54 0 16 17 54 0 16 14 45 0 16 15 47 0 12 12 46 0 13 13 51 1 16 14 54 2 20 18 51 6 19 13 50 1 12 6 51 1 17 14 53 0 14 14 18 16 0 16 10 18 15 0 18 13 18 13 7 13 8 14 27 32 23 30 10 17 46 8 14 33 30 23 21 10 15 51 7 9 33 25 27 30 14 17 53 6 19 21 28 20 12 9 55 5 17 5 19 5 20 5 21 5 21 5 24 5 25 5 26 5 27 5 28 5 5 5 5 5 5 2 3 4 7 8 9 1 10 17 15 1 10 13 12 1 10 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 9 9 9 7 22 1 9 0 28 0 15 H orizontal 1 29 1 40 0 33 0 24 0 28 2 22 1 34 0 22 0 35 0 30 0 36 7 7 5 0 5 6 5 6 7 7 7 1 80 1 59 0 72 0 450 0 123 1 76 0 70 0 86 0 106 0 141 0 90 1 167 0 145 0 124 0 127 0 170 0 150 0 130 0 137 0 125 0 126 0 160 0 126 0 122 0 108 0 125 0 125 0 123 0 147 8 111 1 103 7 149 Vertical 1 31 2 33 1 34 0 1 21 1 24 4 30 2 22 1 27 3 24 0 25 1 30 6 26 8 26 8 30 7 22 4 34 6 33 1 29 1 32 0 34 6 28 0 28 5 18 2 25 2 26 1 21 1 19 5 28 1 18 2 19 10 62 1 19 11 59 2 17 12 54 0 1 47 5 15 10 62 3 15 11 64 3 21 12 56 3 14 8 60 3 19 10 60 3 21 11 66 8 18 13 57 7 63 9 69 7 61 4 63 9 67 6 66 9 65 9 72 9 60 8 69 7 67 8 63 8 67 9 89 8 82 7 60 8 56 8 84 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 4 28 4 29 4 30 4 4 4 4 4 4 0 39 13 18 32 16 16 35 17 21 27 14 14 56 0 26 19 18 44 13 0 34 0 24 31 22 27 13 9 29 25 22 29 12 12 45 9 25 24 22 32 12 12 45 9 23 34 10 15 32 25 18 24 13 20 54 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 14 4 28 4 29 4 30 4 4 4 4 4 4 9 9 9 0 32 18 18 30 10 13 29 16 11 41 0 30 28 15 35 14 14 41 20 10 35 5 9 46 9 12 45 7 23 7 18 9 22 2 17 3 20 8 22 6 22 9 19 2 15 7 17 7 18 9 17 2 11 9 7 16 9 15 9 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 4 18 10 4 19 10 4 20 10 4 21 10 4 22 10 4 26 10 4 28 10 4 29 10 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 1 11 2 11 3 11 4 11 5 11 8 11 9 11 0 9 9 H orizontal 5 8 2 7 2 8 6 Vertical 7 10 6 5 47 Pos Year Day M Del Lcor Linc R R LR R ft Lcor Linc R R LR R ft % on cor inc ft R cor inc ft R 0 25 31 31 28 10 12 38 33 22 24 10 16 50 0 25 17 21 25 13 0 30 0 28 5 24 15 20 7 14 30 32 12 14 8 8 20 33 8 11 7 52 4 59 3 66 9 28 16 15 10 10 27 29 15 12 Pos Year Day M Del Lcor Linc R R LR R ft Lcor Linc R R LR R ft % on cor inc ft R cor inc ft R Pos Year Day M Del Lcor Linc R R LR R ft Lcor Linc R R LR R ft % on cor inc ft R cor inc ft R 0 16 18 20 16 0 22 20 19 35 8 17 17 21 17 9 12 52 9 52

9 10 28 21 26 21 15 17 49 8 30 34 17

0 33

0 28 25 18 23 18 10 23

0 21 13 0 14 19 0 15 10 0 17 13 0 26 0 34 0 31 0 28 0 28 0 38 0 34 0 28 0 30 0 30 0 30 0 37 0 30 0 29 0 24 0 28 0 26 0 26 0 31 0 25 0 22 0 23 0 23 0 21 0 27 0 29 0 35 0 19 0 21 0 25 0 18 0 19 0 22 0 12 0 0 7 5 1 3 1 1 1 0 1 0 2 1 0 0 0 1 1 2 0 0 18 14

0 24 15 24 24 12 16 23 22 19 26 10 13 51 0 32 16 24 31 18 17 28 23 16 36 12 10 49 0 28 24 18 28 12 12 34 34 19 14 14 12 50 0 20 19 20 37 11 12 18 23 25 30 11 11 43 0 22 22 23 21 13 13 23 21 17 28 0 28 16 13 24 15 0 11 9 11 12 6 8 1 0 22 14 14 24 0 3 3 3 8 8 9 48 0 28 16 16 24 15 11 26 23 16 20 11 11 51 9 27 14 19 20 17 14 54 4 12 8 9 15 7 7 49 9 48 3 42 8 46 8 45 6 16 16 20 24 12 2 8 5 1 5 1

0 29 33 21 27 11 11 26 31 28 26 11

0 25 31 27 29 11 12 30 30 36 16 12 15 53 0 27 20 22 19 12

1 34 10 0 28 12 0 38 0 35 0 30 7 9 7 0 38 12 0 29 17 0 39 14 0 41 11 0 38 12 0 29 0 44 0 37 0 25 9 9 8 6 0 37 11

3 21 12 17

0 24 27 29 28 11 13 28 32 26 21 12 13 50 0 24 28 35 26 12 11 24 29 32 29 15 10 51 0 29 31 26 26 15 13 27 31 24 29 14 12 48 0 30 32 28 24 11 0 25 30 19 27 13 9 27 30 26 29 9 9 49 8 48 7 23 29 28 18 18

6 25 10 19 13 58 9 20 11 65

0 24 20 17 29 10 0 22 14 16 23 12

9 28 25 17 23 13 11 47 7 18 17 14 27 13

4 10 11 4 11 11 4 12 11 4 15 11 4 16 11

5 10 5 11 5 14 5 15 5 16 5 17 5 18 5 21 5 22 5 23 5 24 5 25 5 28 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 2 3 4 7 8 9

0 29 20 17 30 14 12 28 17 19 29 10 10 49 0 23 27 14 25 11 10 26 19 15 26 10 0 28 21 15 33 9 11 30 22 20 27 12 14 47

0 24 22 31 29 15 12 29 31 27 21 13 11 52 0 20 32 30 25 11 11 23 28 30 26 12 13 48 0 28 29 31 25 12 11 22 30 39 21 10 0 27 29 33 21 13 17 25 38 31 18 0 31 30 31 21 14 0 22 41 28 21 0 20 38 25 30 5 9 0 26 30 29 28 11 14 25 31 30 28 8 19 45 27 25 8 53 7 11 52 6 9 7 5 7 9 48 9 40 8 47 9 46 7 45 9 52 7 56

5 22 10 64

0 24 16 15 16 13 13 24 16 13 17 11 13 54

8 19 38 33 23 19 10 50 8 25 27 32 28 13 12 48 6 29 29 37 24 14 12 57

3 22 11 70 4 18 10 67

0 25 26 31 34 14 19 44 30 24 18 12 17 53 0 29 35 19 29 16 15 34 24 25 29 14 13 48 0 30 30 27 24 11 18 40 23 19 30 9 17 52 0 25 42 24 27 11 11 29 29 32 30 14 15 46 0 20 33 36 30 11 18 32 22 27 37 10 17 49 0 10 4 14 9 4 6 13 3 8 15 5 6 59 0 22 36 32 29 11 13 31 25 32 32 12 15 49 0 27 27 30 29 11 12 28 24 23 37 9 13 48 0 32 29 21 27 14 12 29 18 28 33 18 13 51 0 29 34 22 24 12 15 33 29 19 30 12 12 47 0 23 30 33 22 12 15 23 29 17 39 11 12 44 0 22 28 28 25 9 12 32 24 26 21 16 17 52 8 14 54 0 23 24 38 32 14 17 34 19 29 37 13 15 53 0 34 32 30 17 15 20 38 25 20 32 0 26 34 25 32 12 11 29 21 34 35 18 19 48 0 31 24 24 31 13 15 33 22 23 33 14 18 50 0 30 23 30 42 14 16 43 21 26 35 12 13 52 0 30 20 24 26 16 17 25 17 15 42 11 13 47 0 37 18 23 32 13 16 35 17 20 38 14 16 52 0 27 26 27 23 12 17 37 14 24 30 14 16 55 0 27 29 34 33 0 28 27 27 35 9 18 42 18 19 44 9 22 50 8 16 38 20 22 38 14 20 49

5 10 5 11 5 14 5 15 5 16 5 17 5 18 5 21 5 22 5 23 5 24 5 30

1 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7 10 8 10

0 33 27 36 21 11 0 19 29 31 26 0 23 32 30 27 0 25 27 35 19 0 20 19 34 18 0 20 14 40 21 0 18 38 21 29 0 22 37 37 16

0 20 37 28 31 10 11 27 29 35 25 7 10 23 29 26 30 7 9 8 21 27 26 36

0 26 12 0 38 11 0 30 11 7 9

8 30 24 32 23 14 13 57 9

0 15 0 27 1

0 25 27 27 24 12 11 20 26 37 22 12 9 10 19 24 28 17 7 12 18 34 20 23

1 12 11 96 9

2 20 15

4 11 10 4 12 10 4 14 10 4 15 10 4 18 10 4 19 10 4 20 10 4 21 10 4 22 10 4 26 10 4 28 10 4 29 10 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 1 11 2 11 3 11 4 11 5 11 8 11 9 11

2 37 12 2 32 3 10

5 10 52

0 27 10

2 114 12 19

0 24 34 33 21 16 14 22 29 34 29 14 12 50 5 10 22 32 31 22 10 12 43 8 11 25 29 35 24 13 13 53

0 13 0 20 0 21 0 23 2 55 0 20 0 27 0 29 0 31 0 28 0 22 9

2 12 12 105 0 13 11 125 3 1 8 9 172 2 17 13 327 9 10 134 1 11 16 88 1 11 12 272 0 7 15 133 0 11 15 128 0 11 15 109 6 5 5 4 0 63 1 50 0 52 1 80

0 15 14 1 26 5 42 2 15 4 16 0 23 1 18 2 19 4 15 3 32 2 29 0 30 1 25

8 10 82

0 15 11 12 11 88 7 12 12 90 7 15 13 91 4 7 3 6 4 9 7 8 91 8 88

5 10 5 11 5 14 5 15 5 16 5 17 5 18 5 21 5 22 5 23 5 24 5 30

5 10 10 95 8 14 96 8 9 92 7 10 91

0 19 14 17 16 11

8 17 17 20 12 15

0 15 17 23 14 11 10 15 16 21 15 11

0 19 30 23 20 12 13 24 28 19 23 13 12 46 0 15 34 38 25 11 16 27 30 25 30 11 15 47 0 11 21 23 15 9 11 15 19 22 16 11 9 50 0 21 32 24 19 14 10 20 25 33 18 17 13 51 0 18 32 33 19 12 13 26 27 33 18 17 20 53 0 20 32 37 20 17 15 22 24 36 28 15 14 53

1 29 1 36 1 32 1 35

1 16 13 60 1 17 14 54 4 18 14 54 5 17 13 61

8 19 8 23 7

0 29 25 24 29 16 15 33 26 26 22 20 17 52 0 31 31 28 28 13 20 45 19 22 29 12 18 54 0 30 26 19 31 12 14 40 20 18 28 11 15 50 0 24 31 29 32 0 20 26 28 45 0 15 10 11 15 0 10 0 15 0 6 8 8 9 11 8 15 38 20 16 40 12 17 47 7 14 41 17 21 37 16 22 47 9 20 46 1 0 5 9 5 50 4 55 5 58 8 56 8 4 8 17 7 17 8 13 9 17 7 26 9 6 6 7 17 0 9 7 12

0 18

4 10 11 4 11 11 4 12 11 4 16 11 4 17 11 4 19 11 4 22 11 4 23 11 4 24 11 4 25 11 4 26 11 4 30 11 4 2 12

0 24 30 25 32 11 19 31 19 21 39

1 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7 10 8 10

2 30 12 24

0 19 28 21 23 12 13 31 20 18 25 14 18 48 0 28 20 21 19 12 14 32 15 23 19 17 16 59 0 27 18 25 22 13 13 25 15 24 30 13 15 54 0 29 26 20 28 0 16 20 14 25 0 21 21 20 45 9 5 9 33 25 21 24 13 12 50 7 23 15 14 22 9 9 45 0 30 18 20 36 14 14 29 18 19 34 15 13 48 0 28 26 20 25 15 13 25 20 17 35 13 12 46 9 13 27 27 19 31 13 13 41 0 32 20 16 35 13 10 28 19 32 25 18 13 52 0 30 21 24 41 12 12 29 31 23 33 13 11 46

6 10 2

0 13 37

0 16 11 14 15 10 9 21 13 20

8 15 14 7 13 17

0 21 2 13 1 30 0 14 0 41 0 24 0 36

8 11 48 9 21 58

2 15 12 33

0 21 33 33 28 11 16 42 12 20 40 14 20 51 0 28 15 27 16 14 24 33 12 10 29 0 28 27 34 30 16 19 38 23 25 32 15 19 53 0 34 26 31 35 17 20 38 26 26 36 14 16 51 0 19 17 23 25 6 18 30 14 19 21 8 20 54 0 28 24 27 27 21 20 34 17 20 31 12 11 52

4 11 10 4 12 10 4 13 10 4 14 10 4 15 10

5 12 5 13

P ossum 1=Josh, 2=C s: harlotte, 3=M ite, 5=P 6=B , 7=B arm utzy, enny onnie, 8=G in, 10=H 12=C , 14=S av olly, indy pock. P os=possum M onth,D elay,L=Left, R ight, cor=correct, inc=incorrect, LR , on=m el=D =R ft=Left R R ft=R R A sessions 3600seconds. ft, R ight ft. ll
H rizon o tal 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 4 4 4 4 4 3 1 2 6 1 2 7 1 2 8 1 2 9 1 2 V ertical 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 5 3 1 5 5 5 5 5 1 4 5 6 7 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 H rizon o tal 0 2 2 2 38 8 8 0 0 3 3 1 38 1 4 6 0 3 1 2 32 3 6 7 0 3 3 1 29 1 3 5 0 2 2 2 35 8 1 7 0 2 2 2 24 8 1 4 0 2 3 2 23 8 0 4 0 0 6 4 3 9 7 45 1 29 3 39 9 39 7 23 9 35 4 26 5 24 7 33 7 28 6 31 2 29 0 51 3 48 2 38 3 39 3 34 1 34 7 30 5 4 4 4 4 3 2 1 4 5 5 1 4 4 4 4 1 0 3 2 3 5 2 6 3 5 4 4 6 6 V rtical e 5 38 22 25 28 6 45 23 19 28 8 41 7 18 42 6 46 14 16 35 8 40 18 16 36 7 34 14 15 35 6 38 21 15 33 0 41 1 37 0 37 1 32 2 17 8 50 7 43 0 25 9 30 8 23 9 6 6 6 5 5 7 49 6 47 9 55 6 49 9 50 8 52 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 5 3 1 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 4 5 6 7 8 1 11 11 52 2 12 6 8 4 5 5 8 3 6 8 9 7 5 8 5 7 9 6 6 56 6 67 6 55 5 51 3 57 6 51 1 53 3 56 6 57 9 60 5 50 8 56 9 60 7 60 4 46 6 52 7 64 9 69 7 64 5 67 5 72 8 67 3 66 6 65 3 65 6 67 4 64 4 69 4 65 8 69 1 69 2 74 4 82 5 74 7 79 7 73 8 72 6 77 6 78 4 83 8 77 7 77 8 80 4 81 7 78 1 77 1 68 1 75 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 8 3 1 38 2 1 5 2 3 5 2 4 5 2 7 5 2 8 5 2 9 5 3 0 5 5 5 5 1 4 6 7 6 6 6 6 6 6 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 0 2 6 0 3 4 0 3 2 0 3 1 0 3 5 0 3 4 0 3 9 0 2 9 0 3 3 0 3 2 0 3 9 0 4 3 0 4 5 0 2 5 0 2 8 H rizontal o 0 2 1 4 2 7 2 2 9 2 3 3 9 3 0 5 3 2 5 9 8 5 9 9 7 4 7 6 7 4 13 6 25 6 24 7 33 8 40 4 35 9 41 8 41 8 43 8 44 6 42 9 44 5 39 V ertical 8 21 12 8 19 15 6 20 17 2 27 13 6 32 10 8 35 11 5 30 11 3 29 3 39 1 40 1 45 8 37 6 35 4 5 6 4 7 8 2 76 6 78 4 80 7 85 6 79 8 76 5 81 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 3 1 2 6 1 2 7 1 2 9 1 2 0 2 2 1 1 1 1 19 22 20 25 11 10 49 7 0 7 9 2 3 0 2 2 2 3 1 1 29 32 30 23 15 16 49 9 4 4 8 5 4 0 3 2 3 2 1 1 35 19 32 28 18 16 59 7 0 0 8 6 4 0 2 2 1 2 1 1 34 22 21 21 14 13 50 7 9 6 5 2 2 0 2 1 1 2 1 3 4 4 0 1 1 1 1 1 5 4 7 7 6 8 29 11 14 21 11 13 53 7 16 9 16 12 7 9 52 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 8 9 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 0 2 2 1 2 0 0 2 6 0 2 1 2 2 8 7 4 8 0 3 4 1 3 0 2 2 2 3 8 2 4 4 0 3 2 1 3 2 7 7 6 7 9 3 3 16 21 24 18 13 9 46 0 2 2 1 3 15 3 4 7 9 8 26 25 30 23 19 15 46 9 27 22 19 30 12 16 50 1 0 5 2 4 0 0 27 3 5 9 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 6 6 H rizon o tal 0 3 2 1 3 9 1 7 2 0 3 1 2 4 7 9 2 2 0 4 2 1 3 0 5 1 1 0 4 1 1 3 2 9 7 5 0 4 1 1 3 2 3 6 6 0 4 1 1 4 8 8 1 1 0 3 2 1 3 4 0 7 5 0 4 2 5 0 6 5 2 0 3 1 2 4 1 4 2 7 0 4 1 1 4 1 6 2 1 0 4 1 1 4 6 0 3 7 0 4 1 1 4 4 6 6 4 0 3 1 1 3 7 7 9 9 0 4 2 1 4 0 0 9 2 0 3 2 1 4 8 1 3 4 0 2 2 7 1 1 7 8 5 9 6 7 9 8 5 6 7 6 8 8 7 5 5 V rtical e 6 30 21 23 37 5 42 21 20 34 5 32 27 20 34 7 30 15 23 37 7 31 20 26 32 3 35 20 29 40 6 38 19 20 38 7 41 25 20 25 4 34 27 23 37 6 8 7 7 7 8 7 7 9 3 50 6 51 4 49 6 49 7 52 3 50 4 50 6 47 7 48 2 52 6 52 3 49 7 48 5 52 5 53 8 53 7 51 5 50 1 52 P Y r D Mn D Lco Lin R R c LR R ft Lcor Linc R R LR R ft % os ea ay o el r c cor in ft R cor inc ft R 0 3 2 1 3 1 12 37 17 20 29 15 17 51 2 2 7 2 3 0 3 2 1 2 1 13 24 29 14 29 2 0 6 8 2 0 2 1 2 2 1 18 26 22 17 28 7 3 6 6 3 0 2 1 1 1 2 2 7 6 0 2 1 1 1 2 6 6 8 5 15 23 26 9 7 21 8 10 7 9 45 9 11 52 5 12 52 9 56 P Y r D y M n D l Lcor Lin R R LR R ft Lcor Linc R R L ft R ft % os ea a o e c cor inc ft R cor inc R R P Y r D M D Lco Lin R R c LR R ft Lcor Lin R R LR R ft % os ea ay on el r c cor in ft R c cor inc ft R P Y r D M n D l Lcor Lin R R c LR R ft Lcor Linc R R L ft R ft % os ea ay o e c cor in ft R cor inc R R 5 1 0 5 1 1 5 1 2 5 1 3 5 1 6 5 1 7 5 1 8 5 1 9 5 2 0 5 2 3 5 2 4 5 2 5 5 2 6 5 2 7 5 3 0 5 3 1 5 5 1 2

1 31 17 22 36 12

8 1 29 0

9 23 15 20 14 12

4 1 1 0 2 4 1 1 3 2 4 1 1 4 2 4 1 1 5 2 4 1 1 6 2 4 1 1 7 2 4 2 1 1 2 4 2 1 2 2 4 2 1 3 2 5 5 5 6 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3

0 2 1 1 2 1 1 6 3 3 1

9 23 20 15 10 53 9 12 48

7 3 1 3 8 8 3 1 6 3 9 4 1 8 3 7 4 4 2 9 3 6 6 3 9 9 4 6 6 3 2

1 37 21 20 38 10

0 3 1 2 2 1 13 26 21 17 27 12 12 51 0 4 0 9 4 0 2 1 1 2 1 10 16 15 14 23 1 3 5 0 0 0 2 1 6 6 8 2 1 8 2 9 8 0 1 1 1 3 6 7 6 6 0 2 1 1 1 0 4 7 4 6 19 19 25 17 14 11 49 9 24 18 19 26 13 13 44 8 22 19 20 24 12 8 17 15 18 14 7 8 49 6 56 9 45

5 1 1

6 11 50

3 2 1 1 6 3 1

4 31 11 11

7 12 79

3 36 11 11 10 84 6 10 10 88 7 7 8 89 5 90 8 87 4 12 10 90 3 11 4 2 8

0 4 1 1 4 11 9 3 0 7 0 5 1 1 4 12 0 7 3 3

3 39 28 25 26 11

0 2 1 1 2 1 4 7 8 6 3

0 2 8

5 1 1 5 1 2 5 1 3 5 1 4 5 1 5 5 1 8 5 2 0

7 1 1 42 0 0 6 1 5 7 7 8

0 2 1 2 5 0 1 2 9 4 0 1 1 3 0 0 1 2 5 8 0 1 1 4 4 0 1 1 4 9 0 0 9 3 4 9 1 2

0 3 1 4 6 1 2

0 2 1 1 2 1 14 25 22 15 18 6 3 4 8 2 0 2 1 1 3 1 2 8 3 5 2 0 2 1 1 8 9 2 8 9 7

8 12 50

0 31 26 35

0 11

1 26 22 27 40 10 2 39 27 23 27 13 6 41 22 22 27 7 41 16 27 36 7 43 17 23 31 8 40 16 28 36 0 17 6 9 15 9 6 7 5 5

9 24 17 22 29 15

6 1 1 46 0 1 5 1 41 1

0 3 1 1 2 1 12 30 18 23 26 14 11 54 6 7 5 9 5 8 23 14 17 21 10 10 46 7 22 24 17 23 15 12 44 9 30 17 23 14 16 11 57 9 18 19 28 16 17 11 50 7 51 0 2 1 1 3 4 6 2 3

3 22 11 42 11 0 23 11 22 1 30 2 40 0 20 3 46 1 27 0 39 1 45 1 44 6 21 8 29 6 28 2 34 0 44 2 43 0 39

8 10 86 5 11 74 7 78

5 1 1 5 1 2 5 1 3 5 1 4 5 1 5 5 1 8 5 2 0 5 2 1 5 2 2 5 2 5 5 2 6 5 2 7 5 2 8 5 2 9 5 5 5 5 5 3 4 5 6 9

0 3 1 3 1 1 2 6 8 5 2 1 9 7

6 36 14

5 1 2 5 1 3 5 1 7 5 1 9 5 2 0 5 2 1 5 2 5 5 2 6 5 2 7 5 2 8 5 5 5 5 5 2 3 7 8 9

1 28 11 10

0 3 1 1 3 1 1 1 3 1 3 0 2 1 1 2 1 1 7 5 9 1

6 10 51

0 3 2 1 4 10 8 6 5 1

0 2 1 1 2 1 12 23 22 22 20 12 6 4 8 9 8

0 1 3 8 0 0 1 1 1 7 0 1 2 4 3 0 2 2 2 2 0 2 2 3 4 0 1 1 5 5 0 2 1 8 3 0 2 5 9

0 2 2 2 1 1 11 20 22 26 24 16 12 54 7 0 3 7 2 0 2 1 1 3 1 11 24 19 26 22 13 11 51 8 8 6 1 4 0 3 1 1 2 1 10 24 25 21 23 15 13 49 1 7 4 8 1 0 1 1 1 2 7 5 3 6 0 1 7 7 6 1 3 7 11 20 23 10 19 9 9 5 11 11 12 7 6 10 42 6 3 55 8 51 7 46 4 47 7 55 9 55 7 57 4 45 5 52 9 48 6 46 0 2 1 1 1 1 10 22 5 2 3 8 3 0 2 1 1 1 5 4 2 5 0 1 1 9 1 8 22 17 12 12 60

1 18 10

3 11 3 12 4 12 6 9 3 5 8 9 8 8

4 1 1 0 2 4 1 1 3 2 4 1 1 4 2 4 1 1 5 2 4 1 1 6 2 4 1 1 7 2 4 2 1 1 2 4 2 1 2 2 4 2 1 3 2 5 1 9 5 2 0 5 2 1 5 2 5 5 2 6 5 2 7 5 2 8 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 2 3 4 7 8 8 9 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3

5 1 0 5 1 1 5 1 1 5 1 4 5 1 5 5 1 6 5 1 7 5 1 8 5 2 1 5 2 2 5 2 3 5 2 4 5 3 0 5 3 1 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 4 5 6 7 8

6 13 10 61

0 2 2 1 39 8 8 1

2 43 13 46 0 20 17 28 1 26 20 24 0 37 5 45 1 35 7 40 3 26 2 33

0 3 2 2 4 1 1 27 23 42 29 20 17 51 3 5 1 0 3 0 0 3 2 2 3 1 1 33 20 26 30 20 20 51 0 7 2 0 6 5 0 3 2 1 5 1 2 2 5 1 0 9 38 20 29 30 19 18 48 0 3 2 1 3 1 1 44 17 22 37 16 20 51 7 6 8 7 1 5 0 3 1 1 3 1 1 41 19 28 17 20 17 57 7 9 5 5 5 1 0 3 2 1 5 1 4 7 3 0 2 0 6 5 1 2 9 8 4 7 9 9 42 17 25 39 14 14 46 5 9 8 8 6 3 8 6 56 7 54 8 48 0 3 2 1 4 1 1 32 19 24 31 20 15 48 1 1 6 0 6 2 0 2 2 1 3 1 0 2 3 0 1 5 8 1 9 9 1 30 18 15 23 0 5 17 3 4 15 14 8 11 45

7 11 38 21 24 27 10 13 52 9 10 43 16 22 31 14 14 51

5 14 18 17 18 13 6 19 16 20 17 12 9 11 35 27 14 15

0 2 2 2 2 13 14 24 30 26 23 13 13 50 5 3 8 6 0 2 3 2 2 13 16 26 34 32 22 15 19 49 6 3 6 7 0 1 2 2 1 11 12 19 26 20 18 8 3 8 7 0 2 1 1 1 10 5 9 1 6 0 1 1 2 1 4 6 6 4 8 22 19 16 15 9 11 50 7 9 6 52 9 56 0 2 2 3 2 11 13 26 32 26 27 16 16 49 2 8 4 7 9 12 17 21 22 10

9 3 1 5 1

0 2 1 1 3 2 9 4 6 1 2

0 2 2 1 27 4 0 6 0 3 1 0 6 0 3 2 1 21 3 0 7 0 2 1 3 8 6 4 0 2 6 0 4 9 0 3 8 0 4 6 0 5 2 0 4 5 0 4 7 0 4 8 0 3 4 0 7 0 1 5 0 3 1 0 1 5 5 3 3

0 3 1 2 2 1 11 20 32 30 14 14 6 3 0 8 7 0 3 1 2 3 1 12 31 25 27 22 13 8 8 0 1 3 0 4 1 2 3 1 10 17 24 42 19 16 0 2 0 3 9 0 3 2 1 3 1 8 0 3 5 6 0 3 1 3 4 8 2 1 7 8 0 3 1 1 3 1 2 4 6 7 5 0 3 2 1 5 1 7 0 7 1 2 0 4 1 0 3 9 9 1 4 6 1 9 0 4 2 3 3 6 5 1 1 4 7 18 36 26 25 15 7 20 25 26 14 14 9 43 27 22 32 11 3 39 25 23 33 15

4 36 10 10 7 34 12 7 7

9 10 67 7 8 4 9 9

5 1 0 5 1 1 5 1 4 5 1 5 5 1 6 5 1 7 5 1 8 5 2 1 5 2 2 5 2 3 5 2 4 5 2 5 5 2 8 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 2 3 4 7 8 9

0 3 1 3 23 10 3 4 1 7 10 6 4 8 0 3 1 3 16 7 8 2

6 27 16 43 13 10 8 26 17 34 7 25 12 28 7 38 12 31 22 9 29 20 27 24 6 26 32 31 12 4 27 18 17 29

0 2 3 3 3 12 14 29 32 38 25 11 14 49 1 9 5 1 0 1 2 4 2 16 21 26 39 27 16 15 18 54 9 3 4 1 0 1 3 3 2 11 18 30 29 28 21 13 19 50 9 4 1 5 0 3 3 4 2 3 7 0 9 0 2 4 5 2 4 3 1 6 0 2 4 4 2 5 2 2 6 0 3 3 3 2 5 6 5 9 0 3 3 4 4 0 3 0 0 0 3 3 4 2 0 7 2 8 0 2 4 4 2 1 7 7 5 0 3 2 5 1 5 2 1 7 7 12 43 24 31 40 6 7 7 3 9 29 35 47 33 9 37 40 32 27 9 37 34 28 42 7 41 31 36 32 4 6 3 7 8 53 8 50 6 53 7 48 6 10 52

8 31 15 22 29 13 10 52 5 25 26 27 28 14 13 51

5 1 0 5 1 1 5 1 2 5 1 3 5 1 6 5 1 7 5 1 8 5 1 9 5 2 0 5 2 3 5 2 4 5 2 5 5 2 6 5 2 7 5 3 0 5 3 1 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 2 3 7 8 9

6 10 78

0 2 1 1 3 1 1 36 14 18 14 12 15 55 2 5 4 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 2 8 4 4 2 9 15 23 19 16 0 2 2 1 2 1 1 26 16 19 28 14 12 50 9 0 6 5 1 1 0 2 2 1 2 1 4 8 4 4 4 0 2 3 1 2 1 2 0 5 6 4 6 26 18 24 19 19 12 50 8 27 28 23 17 13 8 46

2 2 21 10 5 8 3 18 10 7 7 2 13 11 8 2 2 11 8 4 1 21 6 8 3 14 3 1 7 3 4 1 3 2 5 2 1 3 4 2 0 5 2 8 8 9 0 2 27 11 4 3 1 26 10 8 2 4 6 4 7 8 7 8 7 6 6 5 6 6 2

4 20 25 29 20 10 2 15 25 40 17 14 3 28 15 31 14 11 5 28 15 29 23 1 6 1 4 6 7 7 8 4 1 3 6 2 7 6 7 9 7 7 4

8 1 3 1 10 32 14 22 30 14 13 56 7 5 1 9 36 11 17 21 13 7 30 21 20 34 14 9 17 16 19 29 11 8 26 22 18 24 13 7 33 15 22 24 12 9 29 9 28 7 16 31 8 57 8 48 4 48 7 46 8 56

9 11 43 21 30 41 5 12 39 24 33 44 9 14 32 32 23 38

0 3 1 1 3 1 13 35 16 17 34 10 10 50 4 7 6 7 3 0 3 1 1 2 1 1 4 3 7 2 0 3 2 1 3 3 0 4 6 0 4 1 2 2 8 4 1 0 0 7 7 10 38 14 19 29 9 14 51

0 2 2 1 2 1 1 19 25 25 21 12 10 49 5 1 9 6 2 0 0 2 2 2 2 1 1 25 19 25 24 11 14 52 1 2 6 4 1 7 0 2 2 2 3 1 1 26 21 20 27 13 12 46 0 5 1 0 4 2 0 1 1 4 0 9 9 2 4 14 6 8 10 1 7 56 9 55 0 3 1 1 1 1 1 17 16 21 23 11 0 2 9 9 6 1 0 2 2 2 2 1 3 5 3 8 3 0 2 1 1 3 8 7 9 2 0 0 6 6 6 3 4 1 1 2 7 4 3 8 9

6 11 52 8 13 52 3 9 56

6 11 27 18 29 16 4 14 7 15 7 19 9 39 8 40 6 33 7 31 8 35 6 24 5 30 5 26 4 31 3 5 5 10 8 26

5 1 1 4 4 4 4 4

0 3 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 7 5 0 2 1 1 3 3 2 4 8 0 2 1 1 3 5 3 6 2 0 2 1 1 3 8 1 7 0 0 2 1 1 2 5 6 5 6 0 3 1 1 4 1 1 4 0 0 2 1 1 3 3 6 4 8 0 3 1 1 2 1 7 4 4 0 2 2 1 2 3 2 7 9 0 1 1 1 3 9 6 9 2 0 2 2 1 2 3 2 8 6 0 2 3 0 2 2 1 2 1 2 1 6 9 1 0 3 1 1 3 1 5 0 6 3 2 9 7 9 6

6 29 20 24 15 13 10 51

8 19 21 35 28 16 10 50 2 0 9 6 7 4 3 7 6 1 1 3 9 3 42 3 58 8 40

3 1 2 6 1 2 7 1 2 8 1 2 9 1 2

0 1 3 3 2 14 14 29 32 28 12 15 14 53 7 0 4 1 0 1 2 1 3 4 8 0 0 3 4 1 3 5 8 8 4 14 20 17 12 2 38 9 2 5 7 49 8 57 3 50 9 1 2 1 9 1 5 4 8 11 16 18 20 12 8 9 5 32 28 11 7 10 51

5 1 0 5 1 4 5 1 5 5 2 8 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 2 3 4 8 9

8 1 30 19 22 24 13 14 52 0

8 10 26 16 20 25 11 13 50 8 11 30 18 8 12 49 8 10 51 6 10 40

4 12 14 6 23 12 7 31 10 9 32 17 5 28 7 7 6 9

0 2 1 3 8 3 7 0 3 1 3 0 2 5 0 4 1 0 4 1 0 3 3 0 3 7 0 2 2 0 4 0 0 2 4 0 3 1 0 4 6 0 9 0 3 2

9 11 16 18 20

9 34 12 22 15

0 1 1 1 3 4 8 3 4 0 2 2 1 3 8 6 5 4

7 17 23 19 21

0 1 2 3 0 9 4

0 2 2 3 11 7 2 0 3 3 11 5 2 3 13 3 3 3 5 3 3 2 9 2 9 8 2 6 0 1 0 2 2 4 8 7 6 3 6 7 2

0 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 0 2 1 0 3 1 1 3 1 3 8 7 2 2 0 2 2 2 3 1 7 4 0 1 2 0 1 2 2 6 5 2 6 3 0 2 2 1 3 3 1 8 8 0 2 1 1 2 3 0 9 7

9 29 29 26 13 15 11 55 6 31 21 35 15 15 14 53 7 23 25 28 26 15 3 33 8 21 9 50 9 27 22 22 30 14 10 47 5 10 11 52

4 1 1 0 2 4 1 1 3 2 4 1 1 4 2 4 1 1 5 2 4 1 1 6 2 4 2 1 2 2 4 2 1 3 2 5 2 1 5 2 4 5 2 5 5 5 5 3 8 9 1 1 1 2 2 2 2

0 1 3 3 1 7 0 6 6 0 1 3 2 2 6 3 6 1 0 8 1 1 1 3 1 2

9 15 23 38 26 14 10 13 51 9 11 24 33 21 18 10 12 45 5 5 10 10 11 13 3 4 45

8 34 17 19 25 10 11 51 7 26 15 15 30 12 10 50 7 37 12 15 25 10 11 51 7 9 9 47 8 48 7 48 9 54 9 51 9 49 8 10 49

4 3 15 11 3 2 2 11 11 9

4 34 19 11

0 1 4 3 1 10 14 24 24 25 28 11 16 48 7 0 0 3 0 1 2 3 1 13 12 21 13 33 23 14 15 57 8 4 2 7 0 2 2 2 1 12 12 25 19 22 23 12 14 54 5 1 4 9 0 1 1 2 1 11 15 20 22 16 13 7 8 0 4 0 1 1 2 2 11 10 14 23 26 21 5 8 5 6 0 6 3 2 1 4 8 1 5 6 6 4 6 6 9 9 7 35 26 9 0 2 3 2 1 14 1 4 9 5 0 1 1 2 1 5 2 0 4 0 6 8 1 4 9 0 1 2 6 1 1 1 4 6 42 42 11 8 6 11 9 9 11 52 8 6 9 6 6 2 4 9 48 2 43 5 49 7 55 6 55 5 48 8 50

5 1 0 5 1 1 5 1 4 5 1 5 5 1 6 5 1 7 5 1 8 5 2 1 5 2 2 5 2 3 5 2 4 5 3 0

7 11 26 23 10 34

8 25 18 36 9 41 10 26 6 35 3 26

7 11 30 15 14 29 9 10 31 14 13 27

5 24 15

9 1 38 21 24 19 13 14 51 0 9 24 26 31 19 12 13 53 7 22 19 19 18 5 6 53 5 48 9 56 9 54 8 55 5 49 6

8 10 84 6 9 8 0 6

5 1 0 5 1 1 5 1 4 5 1 5 5 1 6 5 1 7 5 1 8 5 2 1

0 2 2 2 2 1 9 2 1 7 1

8 1 2 1 10 19 11 15 31 5 7 4 7 12 43 11 13 23 9 8

5 1 0 5 1 3 5 1 4 5 1 5 5 1 6 5 2 0 5 2 2

0 3 1 2 3 2 5 0 3 1 3 2 3 5

6 11

0 3 1 1 3 1 2 5 4 6 1 0 2 1 2 2 8 7 1 6 0 3 1 1 3 4 2 5 2 0 3 1 1 2 4 6 1 9

8 22 16 24 34 11 5

0 3 2 1 2 1 1 23 25 25 28 10 1 7 8 5 4 0 0 3 1 2 2 1 1 3 2 8 4 0 3 1 2 2 1 3 6 0 7 3 0 2 2 2 3 5 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 1 4 3 0 8 9 27 22 26 20 12 9 23 19 27 27 11

7 13 58

6 11 37 10 27 11 5 26 12 6 4 5 7 40 16 27 13 5 17 12 26 10

5 10 77

0 2 1 2 2 1 14 39 12 12 33 9 5 4 8 0

9 15 12 16 17 5 16 13 8 17 15 2 12 9 12

7 28 20 13 34 12 11 48 7 30 20 17 25 12 6

5 3 10 14 6 9 10

8 1 36 18 18 25 5 6 5 17 12 12 12

9 15 51 5

0 3 1 2 2 1 1 31 22 22 23 11 4 5 0 7 7 1

0 2 1 1 2 1 11 23 22 10 24 6 3 8 1 0

5 1 0

0 1 1 1 1 3 1 3 4

M atchingtoS ple, H am orizontal versusV ertical, S ultaneousP im resentation(continued). P ossum 1=Josh, 2=C s: harlotte, 3=M ite, 5=P 6=B , 7=B arm utzy, enny onnie, 8=G in, 10=H 12=C , 14=S av olly, indy pock. P os=possum M onth,D elay,L=Left, R ight, cor=correct, inc=incorrect, LR , on=m el=D =R ft=Left R R ft=R R A sessions 3600seconds. ft, R ight ft. ll
H rizon o tal 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 6 6 6 6 6 6 5 2 3 5 2 4 5 3 0 5 3 1 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 4 5 6 7 8 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 5 5 5 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 3 4 4 4 4 4 V ertical 9 12 52 8 7 6 3 1 8 8 9 6 6 5 4 7 4 4 8 5 6 2 3 3 9 9 51 9 51 6 47 5 57 3 46 1 49 7 53 6 49 8 52 7 42 6 48 4 58 4 46 9 54 3 57 7 49 4 50 3 48 6 52 4 53 3 55 4 48 5 48 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 5 2 3 5 2 4 5 2 5 5 2 8 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 2 3 4 7 8 9 0 1 1 2 1 8 3 7 7 0 2 1 2 2 1 7 3 1 0 2 2 2 1 3 8 9 4 0 1 2 1 2 6 8 9 4 9 8 8 8 11 21 15 26 6 14 17 19 25 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 5 3 1 5 5 5 5 5 1 4 5 6 7 0 3 1 2 1 2 8 9 9 0 2 2 3 1 9 6 7 2 0 2 2 3 1 6 6 8 1 0 2 1 5 8 6 1 7 0 2 2 4 1 5 2 0 8 0 3 1 2 2 7 8 7 0 7 9 5 9 7 8 7 24 25 29 23 6 25 19 26 34 6 30 21 19 33 7 29 27 24 23 9 36 18 18 32 6 18 25 36 25 8 8 9 8 3 7 7 57 5 56 8 55 5 64 7 57 5 57 7 7 7 7 7 7 0 2 2 1 1 1 0 3 9 2 0 5 8 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 6 6 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 5 5 H rizon o tal 0 2 2 2 15 2 1 5 0 2 1 4 12 3 8 4 0 2 1 2 21 9 9 9 0 3 2 2 23 3 8 5 0 2 1 2 21 5 9 9 0 3 1 2 18 1 6 7 0 2 1 2 22 8 3 2 0 3 1 2 13 7 1 6 0 3 1 3 12 2 4 1 0 2 1 4 10 5 7 1 0 3 1 3 11 1 5 6 0 2 2 2 13 5 3 7 0 2 2 3 4 4 2 9 0 2 1 3 10 2 8 4 0 3 1 3 12 3 3 2 0 2 3 3 11 4 1 0 0 2 1 3 16 7 9 3 0 2 1 3 2 9 8 8 0 1 1 1 18 2 7 1 0 2 1 3 19 2 6 2 0 2 2 3 11 1 7 3 0 3 1 2 20 0 9 8 0 2 2 2 14 9 0 7 0 3 1 1 19 3 8 8 0 2 2 2 21 3 4 8 0 2 2 2 13 2 6 9 0 2 2 2 17 6 4 9 0 2 3 2 16 2 2 8 0 2 2 2 14 4 0 6 0 2 2 3 10 6 8 2 0 2 2 2 10 4 0 8 0 3 1 2 21 4 6 8 0 2 1 2 21 9 2 8 0 2 1 2 13 5 6 3 0 1 1 3 26 8 7 1 0 3 1 2 22 0 8 3 0 2 2 2 15 9 2 3 0 3 3 8 1 26 8 5 5 9 7 8 7 8 7 7 7 5 6 6 4 4 4 5 6 3 1 8 6 6 5 6 6 6 6 2 7 5 4 7 7 5 6 4 3 6 2 5 5 4 3 5 5 6 0 7 5 4 4 5 4 8 3 3 4 6 V rtical e 6 16 26 22 18 7 26 26 25 22 5 14 40 37 16 6 14 30 33 16 3 16 32 31 12 5 16 29 36 21 2 15 24 28 18 7 19 29 19 21 8 17 28 18 29 8 26 24 14 31 3 21 9 24 33 9 26 21 15 30 8 16 16 15 35 8 32 10 21 26 6 25 20 18 33 9 26 28 15 25 9 22 22 20 27 3 13 14 20 9 6 23 23 26 20 9 32 16 18 24 9 34 24 17 21 7 19 18 26 29 7 26 17 20 27 4 25 19 23 28 5 27 20 19 27 5 22 23 19 32 8 26 22 19 29 8 26 20 16 21 7 40 19 15 21 6 36 15 18 17 7 28 19 21 33 6 29 18 17 25 6 22 8 28 20 4 33 15 22 24 5 27 22 20 24 6 32 12 24 21 4 27 11 19 28 9 27 20 35 26 6 28 28 31 25 6 17 35 32 20 5 23 20 23 25 4 33 17 18 25 7 20 23 28 30 6 25 22 26 26 8 28 16 29 20 3 13 20 20 11 5 14 22 26 18 2 20 24 25 25 6 21 18 22 21 4 23 25 31 16 5 26 26 15 23 3 26 24 20 30 5 23 23 19 22 5 20 21 27 26 7 19 23 15 26 9 26 24 24 27 3 29 17 18 27 6 31 9 10 27 7 24 20 18 18 5 18 21 26 15 7 1 6 8 7 9 7 7 6 5 2 3 8 3 4 6 6 4 4 2 5 2 5 4 7 7 4 2 3 5 6 6 7 8 7 7 7 5 52 8 57 8 55 2 50 5 54 4 57 4 55 5 55 4 58 4 54 7 61 5 57 5 55 6 54 3 52 6 66 5 51 8 53 8 57 1 49 4 57 9 56 2 55 5 54 5 52 5 53 5 50 4 49 5 55 8 59 6 56 6 58 6 63 6 56 3 54 9 61 7 57 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 5 3 1 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 4 5 6 7 8 0 2 3 4 16 0 1 1 0 1 3 3 26 5 9 1 0 1 3 3 22 9 1 2 0 1 1 2 27 9 9 6 0 2 2 2 17 0 8 6 0 2 2 2 24 4 9 6 0 1 3 3 20 6 0 3 0 1 2 3 16 3 7 7 0 1 1 2 10 2 4 8 0 1 2 2 12 5 3 7 0 1 2 3 16 7 7 3 0 9 3 3 10 0 1 0 2 2 3 15 0 4 3 0 1 3 2 17 9 1 4 0 2 3 2 16 4 4 5 0 1 3 1 26 7 0 4 0 2 2 2 24 4 1 6 0 1 2 2 19 9 0 6 0 2 2 3 28 3 1 1 0 1 2 3 20 5 5 0 0 2 1 1 23 1 6 7 0 1 2 2 17 7 2 3 0 1 2 2 20 7 2 2 6 10 57 5 5 3 6 6 6 7 5 3 8 6 8 4 6 5 5 2 3 6 2 3 5 9 47 5 48 9 50 6 53 5 48 7 51 9 58 2 57 6 52 4 51 8 51 5 57 5 46 8 48 4 42 6 51 4 47 6 51 9 51 6 51 4 52 3 52 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 4 4 4 4 4 3 1 2 6 1 2 7 1 2 8 1 2 9 1 2 0 2 3 3 1 1 1 30 26 26 24 15 17 52 1 8 4 5 3 5 0 2 3 3 1 1 2 26 28 30 29 0 5 8 9 0 1 0 3 2 2 1 0 6 2 3 1 21 4 9 13 18 0 1 3 3 2 1 1 22 26 28 24 5 3 1 3 3 4 8 18 51 6 15 52 9 9 48 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 5 5 5 4 5 9 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 H rizontal o 0 2 2 2 2 1 7 4 7 0 2 2 3 2 6 8 0 0 0 1 2 2 1 2 3 4 6 0 1 1 2 1 1 2 1 4 0 1 1 2 1 8 6 3 1 0 1 1 1 1 8 2 7 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 2 0 6 1 1 8 6 0 1 1 1 0 5 1 0 1 0 6 1 9 6 5 6 7 8 8 1 0 9 7 8 4 4 5 5 1 1 2 6 0 2 3 7 0 0 5 V ertical 4 22 25 26 23 6 18 34 35 20 3 18 24 18 13 3 8 18 20 13 6 15 18 11 22 3 11 19 15 12 3 15 4 3 9 6 12 9 8 14 6 11 9 17 10 5 16 7 7 6 3 1 4 2 2 2 2 0 5 6 4 2 0 3 4 48 5 52 4 49 3 51 4 50 1 53 4 54 3 46 0 40 3 51 4 59 3 49 9 51 4 52 5 51 0 50 5 57 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 2 3 4 7 8 9 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 H rizon o tal 0 2 3 3 2 1 3 2 6 V rtical e 7 15 38 24 20 32 8 17 49 P Y r D Mn D Lco Lin R R c LR R ft Lcor Linc R R LR R ft % os ea ay o el r c cor in ft R cor inc ft R 0 3 1 1 2 1 13 30 15 14 29 0 5 9 6 1 0 3 1 1 2 1 12 26 25 17 28 6 2 8 8 5 0 2 2 1 3 1 9 0 4 5 3 0 3 2 3 3 7 2 2 0 0 2 1 4 6 0 0 5 6 9 9 9 1 6 5 1 3 6 8 8 5 1 1 6 5 7 3 6 9 3 4 6 6 2 3 8 4 5 4 20 31 23 43 1 23 1 6 8 18 16 8 14 7 5 3 P Y r D y M n D l Lcor Lin R R LR R ft Lcor Linc R R L ft R ft % os ea a o e c cor inc ft R cor inc R R 5 1 1 5 1 2 5 1 3 5 1 4 5 1 5 5 1 8 5 2 0 5 2 1 5 2 2 5 2 5 5 2 6 5 2 7 5 2 8 5 2 9 5 5 5 5 5 5 2 3 4 5 6 9 6 10 21 25 22 28 P Y r D M D Lco Lin R R c LR R ft Lcor Lin R R LR R ft % os ea ay on el r c cor in ft R c cor inc ft R P Y r D M n D l Lcor Lin R R c LR R ft Lcor Linc R R L ft R ft % os ea ay o e c cor in ft R cor inc R R 0 3 3 3 2 15 13 33 38 22 36 10 10 48 4 6 5 6 0 3 3 3 2 11 10 39 33 28 33 12 10 52 8 3 2 9 0 3 3 4 2 12 12 32 36 23 43 4 0 8 5 0 3 3 3 2 10 3 2 1 8 0 3 4 3 2 8 3 6 2 0 4 2 3 2 3 9 8 9 0 2 2 4 2 5 2 0 1 9 29 32 22 41 7 11 51 7 7 46 0 2 2 3 3 14 14 34 21 25 38 12 13 49 4 3 1 6 9 11 41 22 27 47 12 12 51 9 12 43 33 21 41 9 10 27 28 20 35 7 12 52 9 8 51 7 12 53 8 13 51 4 8 44 8 53 8 52 8 48 7 48 6 53 6 48 5 45 9 49 8 45 7 53 7 56 7 62 6 62 9 59 6 60 2 62 4 69 7 70 3 71 5 65 5 70 7 64 7 67 8 68 9 71 6 67 8 64 8 66 7 55 8 66 6 57 6 58 9 55 6 64 7 63 8 64 8 56 7 62 4 62 8 62 6 62 6 63 5 66 5 66 9 10 46 3 8 9 4 7 8 8 9

6 28 20 29 20 16

5 1 0 5 1 1 5 1 2 5 1 3 5 1 6 5 1 7 5 1 8 5 1 9 5 2 4 5 2 5 5 2 6 5 2 7 5 3 0 5 3 1

4 10 10

0 2 2 3 19 10 9 2 1

0 3 2 2 2 6 8 3 8 0 3 2 2 3 5 6 5 3 0 3 2 2 3 2 2 2 6 0 2 2 2 4 5 3 7 1 0 2 2 2 4 9 7 1 1 0 3 2 2 3 5 0 7 1 0 1 1 5 0 0 3 1 4 0 9 2 2 8 2 2

6 34 27 29 26 5 24 27 31 34 5 29 16 32 33 6 35 20 33 27 6 23 24 26 46 7 30 24 18 42 9 34 17 23 30 3 19 11 10 20 7 37 17 27 32 2 29 15 11 15 7 42 13 15 42 5 36 13 19 38 8 41 14 17 39 2 16 10 13 16 8 25 21 34 22 2 16 8 6 15 4 24 10 12 23

5 1 0 5 1 1 5 1 4 5 1 5 5 1 6 5 1 7 5 1 8 5 2 1 5 2 2 5 2 3 5 3 0 5 3 1 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 4 5 6 7 8

0 1 1 2 1 5 8 2 5 0 1 2 1 6 2 0 0 1 2 3 5 8 4 0 0 3 1 1 8 5 0 1 0

4 16 18 20 18 6 15 11 2 13 16 16 12 5 24 27 31 10 8 20 26 18 19 2 10 10 0 0 0 9 1 7 0

0 3 2 3 3 11 12 39 25 26 36 2 4 6 3 0 3 3 3 2 1 1 5 8 0 2 3 3 3 6 5 8 6 9 12 36 20 26 45 8 12 29 33 27 48

5 1 1 5 1 2 5 1 3 5 1 4 5 1 5 5 1 8 5 2 0 5 2 1 5 2 2 5 2 5 5 2 6 5 5 5 3 4 6

8 11 52

5 11 27 26 21 21

0 4 2 2 2 12 11 39 35 16 32 10 10 53 6 7 8 2

0 1 4 2 1 2 2 6 2

0 3 1 3 3 1 4 2 0 0 1 0 3 1 2 3 3 8 4 7 0 3 1 1 4 7 6 7 3 0 3 2 2 2 4 3 5 9 0 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 8 0 3 1 1 3 4 7 5 9 0 1 5 8 1 1 0 1 0 2 1 1 1 8 2 4 8

0 3 4 2 3 10 10 33 32 31 32 1 0 3 3 0 4 3 3 2 14 16 33 31 26 42 3 0 6 2 0 4 3 3 2 14 14 36 40 22 45 4 6 5 8 0 3 2 3 2 4 5 2 8 0 3 4 3 3 5 0 5 0 8 15 35 34 19 31 9 7 33 43 31 33 8 35 36 24 35 7 34 31 24 49 9 34 26 26 45 8 36 31 29 39 6 27 41 31 35

0 4 2 3 2 15 12 29 21 27 49 12 3 6 5 1

0 1 1 2 3 8 2

4 12 15 22 11

6 11 50

0 3 1 1 4 1 5 7 7 0 0

5 10 53

0 2 3 4 2 10 11 41 28 30 38 9 3 5 8 0 3 3 3 3 10 4 3 2 0 0 2 3 3 3 10 9 6 8 6 0 3 2 3 3 4 6 8 1 0 3 3 3 3 0 6 8 2 0 3 3 2 3 4 6 9 4 0 3 2 3 2 1 9 3 7 0 1 2 8 9 0 2 1 6 6 0 1 2 1 7 0 1 2 6 0 0 3 1 1 6 0 3 4 0 2 9 0 3 1 6 7 7 9 4 0 3 4 0 8 3 8 3 4 3 1 3 4 3 3 6 2 3 4 6 3 2 4 7 5 7 4 6 5 1 8 6 9 6 5 6 7 4 5 5 8 3 1 4 5 3 5 5 4 2 4 4 4 2 5 7 3 5 4 4 4

5 1 0 5 1 1 5 1 2 5 1 3 5 1 6 5 1 7 5 1 8 5 1 9 5 2 0 5 2 3 5 2 4 5 2 5 5 2 6 5 2 7 5 3 0 5 3 1 5 5 1 2

3 10 57

0 1 4 3 1 1 1 23 26 31 27 15 18 48 9 1 0 8 3 6 0 2 3 2 2 1 2 30 21 34 24 16 19 55 4 0 9 2 7 0 0 2 3 3 1 1 1 24 30 27 28 13 16 49 1 7 6 7 1 5 0 2 2 1 1 0 8 6 8 0 1 1 2 1 3 4 1 0 0 1 1 1 4 8 2 7 9 8 8 17 23 26 17 14 13 48 4 10 52 7 6 47 7 58 8 53 7 47 7 45 2 45 6 48 8 47 7 45 8 55 7 10 15 13 15 8 1 13 20 14 13 2

8 14 51

4 1 1 0 2 4 1 1 3 2 4 1 1 4 2 4 1 1 5 2 4 1 1 6 2 4 1 1 7 2 4 2 1 1 2 4 2 1 3 2 5 5 5 6 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3

5 1 1 5 3 1 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 4 5 6 7 8

4 37 23 24 33 10 2 39 11 41 0 34 0 28 1 38 0 38 1 40 1 38 2 31 4 32 2 35 6 44 3 48 2 42 0 42 6 29 4 35 0 42 3 36 5 32 4 10 4 11 5 13 2 11 2 10 6 11 3 11 3 11 5 6 2 10 0 10 4 3 6 7 8 6 6 2 1 6 5 2 7 8 6 5 4 6 5 7 6 6 6 7

9 21 18 22 19 11 14 54 7 27 20 21 18 15 13 48 6 14 26 32 8 14 15 19 3 11 17 24 6 1 7 14 11 6 8 5 7 16 13 22 8 12 9 5 6 7 56 5 50 9 55 8 50 3 53 6 44 9 60 2 51 4 55 8 52 5 47 7 56 7 56 8 52 2 53 8 48 2 49 6 48 2 51 2 49 2 48 5 55 3 47 1 53 8 18 23 16 10

8 11 20 27 22 25 11 12 50

0 2 1 2 1 1 1 12 22 22 16 11 2 3 7 0 7 2 0 1 1 2 1 1 1 14 22 23 11 12 7 6 1 8 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 7 1 1 1 8 6 5 6 1 1 1 6 0 2 9 1 7 8 9 5 4 7 4 5 8 7 13 15 18 13 5 4 8 12 15 6 17 15 8 4 7 4 9 7 6 2 7

0 2 2 1 3 3 2 0 5

0 2 2 1 1 1 4 1 9 5 3 0 1 1 1 1 1 5 5 8 9 2 0 9 1 1 1 5 8 3 7 0 1 2 2 2 1 7 8 2 2 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 6 4 1 9 1 0 0 6 1 1 3 0 6 3 5 9 7 9 5 7 2 8 7 4 6 9 9 4 3 3 4 3 5 6 2 6 0 1 1 1 1 6 0 4 6

5 12 63

7 23 22 26 17 14 6 10 7 7 3 6 8 1 7 9 8

5 2 0 5 2 4 5 2 6 5 2 7 5 2 8 5 5 5 5 5 2 3 4 8 9

0 1 2 1 3 1 7 9 1 1 8 4

6 1 0 4 4

9 11 17 13 15 4 14 11 12 16 9 13 13 5 16 9 12 15 12 11

8 1 1 1 4 4 4

5 1 1 5 1 2 5 1 3 5 1 4 5 1 5 5 1 8 5 2 0 5 2 1 5 2 2 5 2 5 5 2 6 5 2 7 5 2 8 5 2 9 5 5 5 5 5 5 2 3 4 5 6 9

7 2 10 8

5 1 0 5 1 1 5 1 1 5 1 4 5 1 5 5 1 6 5 1 7 5 1 8 5 2 1 5 2 2 5 2 4 5 3 0 5 3 1 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 4 5 6 7 8

0 1 1 1 7 6 6

0 2 1 2 2

0 1 2 2 1 1 1 19 30 17 19 9 0 9 6 2 5 0 1 2 2 1 1 1 12 18 21 18 6 3 3 1 2 0 0 2 2 2 2 1 1 17 29 26 27 4 1 8 5 2 3 0 1 2 1 1 8 3 8 7 0 1 3 2 2 5 9 9 7 8 7 14 26 21 14

8 10 50 7 9 9 7 51 9 54 8 48 7 47

0 3 1 1 2 3 0 2 5 0 3 1 1 2 2 0 6 7 0 3 3 9 1 2 2 5 0 3 1 1 2 2 4 6 1 0 2 1 2 2 6 1 0 0 0 2 6 7 1 2 5 8 0 3 1 2 1 0 4 4 8 0 2 1 1 1 8 5 8 6 0 1 2 3 1 9 0 0 8 0 3 1 1 1 1 3 9 7 0 2 2 1 2 1 7 6 2 0 2 2 2 1 1 0 8 7 0 1 1 1 2 5 9 9 6 0 1 2 2 1 4 4 3 7 0 1 2 1 2 3 6 9 2 0 1 1 2 1 2 9 1 9 0 1 1 1 2 7 3 7 8 0 2 1 2 1 2 8 1 4 0 1 2 1 3 2 0 5 0 0 2 1 4 1 9 2 7 0 2 1 2 2 4 2 0 4 0 1 1 2 1 9 7 4 9 0 2 2 1 1 3 4 7 9 0 1 1 1 1 7 9 9 3 0 1 2 2 8 6 4 6 0 2 1 2 1 1 7 0 0

3 26 13 40 4 35 21 25 0 30 4 27 5 32 4 37 9 43 5 35 7 40 4 38 4 41 9 32 4 35 4 34 3 32 5 37 4 41 3 27 5 32 5 26 5 32 5 27 5 32 5 33 15 33

0 2 2 2 2 1 10 19 24 27 25 10 10 47 4 7 0 5 2 0 2 1 2 0 6 1 0 1 5 0 1 2 0 9 8 10 20 22 14 3 2 7 23 12 9 11 28 5 4 0 2 1 1 1 1 1 9 8 6 0 9 1 2 7 1 1 7 8 7 13 26 26 11 14 5 12 19 19

0 1 2 2 1 1 1 17 18 26 19 11 11 51 6 6 2 6 0 0 0 2 2 2 2 1 1 19 20 34 16 12 1 3 3 2 5 0

9 31 10 12 3 36 11 3 28 12 2 25 15 5 21 15 4 24 17 3 18 26 2 28 21 1 14 22 1 22 24 3 21 21 5 24 9 2 28 12 4 15 18 2 18 15 4 31 14 9 24 16 6 27 16 5 31 14 7 21 11 8 7 18 12

0 2 3 3 1 1 1 27 28 34 23 12 14 55 7 1 6 8 3 6 6 1 24 33 25 29 10 12 42 2

9 1 1 1 9 3 1

6 14

5 1 0 5 1 1 5 1 4 5 1 5 5 1 6 5 1 7 5 1 8 5 2 1 5 2 2 5 2 3 5 2 4 5 2 5 5 2 8 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 2 3 4 7 8 9

6 33 11 23 18

0 1 1 2 1 9 7 6 6 0 1 4 6 9 1 1

8 13 26 22 14 11 5 7 12 13 9 4 2 9 3 7 7 5 3 5 5 6

9 10 69 6 10 68

0 2 1 2 1 1 11 17 23 18 10 1 0 4 4 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 5 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 4 5 2 0 2 2 1 2 2 2 4 3 0 1 1 1 1 4 4 6 6 0 1 1 1 1 3 4 0 5 0 1 1 1 1 2 5 9 9 0 1 1 2 2 8 8 7 3 0 1 2 1 2 6 1 4 0 0 1 1 2 2 8 6 4 2 4 16 20 17

9 11 58

0 3 3 3 2 1 1 23 33 29 27 10 11 51 3 0 1 0 2 0 0 2 3 2 2 1 1 26 34 31 18 12 14 49 1 5 7 3 0 0 0 2 3 2 2 1 1 5 3 0 6 2 2 1 7 9 2 9 1 23 25 29 25 1 5 9 17 18 13 26 8 10 49 5 8 44 9 47 0 2 2 2 1 1 1 18 25 27 16 11 11 53 5 8 3 2 3 3 0 2 3 3 2 1 1 17 30 30 29 11 4 2 1 2 2 2 0 1 3 3 1 9 9 4 9 0 2 3 3 1 0 6 0 9 8 1 24 34 20 29 2

5 1 1 5 1 2 5 1 3 5 1 4 5 1 5 5 1 8 5 2 0 5 2 1 5 2 2 5 2 5 5 2 6 5 2 7 5 2 8 5 2 9 5 5 2 3

4 14 16 10 10 2 26 22 16 16 2 8 14 23 15 8 0 11 15 16

9 1 25 35 31 20 13 13 49 1 9 14 44

4 15 20 17 13 4 19 24 32 14 2 10 22 25 11 4 18 28 25 9

0 2 2 3 1 1 1 20 22 34 23 12 12 57 2 3 7 7 3 4 0 2 3 2 1 1 1 19 35 30 19 13 12 48 2 4 7 7 7 4 0 1 3 3 2 6 4 4 0 8 1 29 28 25 25 4 9 18 49 0 2 3 2 2 1 3 8 7 2 3 0 2 2 3 2 1 0 7 5 5 2 0 2 4 2 2 1 2 1 7 4 3 8 25 35 30 21 14 10 48 9 16 31 35 27 11 8 15 30 36 32 8 9 49 5 44 7 46

5 1 0 5 1 1 5 1 2 5 1 3 5 1 6 5 1 7 5 1 8 5 1 9 5 2 0

5 1 1

0 1 2 3 1 1 1 23 28 27 23 11 11 54 9 8 8 4 3 6

0 2 2 2 2 1 1 18 37 24 28 10 8 2 9 9 4 0 0 2 3 3 2 1 1 31 28 29 24 2 1 4 6 0 0 0 2 3 3 2 1 8 1 1 1 0

8 10 52

5 29 12 28

9 28 29 33 22 11 12 54

M atchingtoS ple, H am orizontal versusV ertical, S ultaneousP im resentation(continued). P ossum 1=Josh, 2=C s: harlotte, 3=M ite, 5=P 6=B , 7=B arm utzy, enny onnie, 8=G in, 10=H 12=C , 14=S av olly, indy pock. P os=possum M onth,D elay,L=Left, R ight, cor=correct, inc=incorrect, LR , on=m el=D =R ft=Left R R ft=R R A sessions 3600seconds. ft, R ight ft. ll

Horizontal versus Vertical Discrimination Possums: 1=Josh, 3=Marmite, 4=Tom, 5=Putzy, 6=Benny, 7=Bonnie, 8=Gavin, 9=Vela, 10=Holly. All sessions 2400 seconds in length. Pos=possum, M on=month, H=horizontal, V=vertical, cor=correct, inc=incorrect, Rft=reinforcement, %=percent correct.
Pos Yea Day MonHCoHIncVcorVInc HRftVRft % 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 5 12 5 13 5 14 5 15 5 18 5 19 5 20 5 21 5 22 5 25 5 26 5 27 5 28 5 29 5 5 5 5 5 5 2 3 4 5 6 9 4 45 39 46 36 17 17 55 4 47 38 44 42 18 21 53 4 50 30 41 39 17 17 57 4 70 12 32 50 25 22 62 4 65 22 30 55 21 19 55 4 66 11 25 52 23 20 59 4 63 13 33 41 23 23 64 4 63 14 27 47 21 19 60 4 61 18 27 51 19 22 56 4 55 14 26 41 20 23 60 4 50 16 27 42 20 21 57 4 76 4 42 38 22 25 74 4 61 13 45 30 25 23 71 4 63 5 80 5 76 2 47 20 24 24 83 7 66 24 31 31 82 8 57 28 32 31 79 Pos Yea Day MonHCoHIncVcorVInc HRftVRft % 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 5 24 5 27 5 28 5 29 5 30 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 4 5 6 7 8 6 56 31 64 23 25 26 69 6 52 35 68 20 22 24 69 6 46 38 61 24 23 21 63 6 53 26 54 25 25 25 68 6 53 21 54 23 24 25 71 7 54 16 52 16 24 26 77 7 47 29 61 14 24 21 72 7 51 29 59 21 26 24 69 7 49 30 59 19 21 24 69 7 48 20 52 19 23 21 72 7 54 31 63 20 26 22 70 7 51 17 54 14 23 24 77 7 52 16 60 9 25 25 82 7 47 17 50 15 23 24 75 7 45 22 44 22 23 20 67 7 48 13 38 22 26 22 71 7 49 19 47 24 23 24 69 7 49 23 47 22 23 23 68 7 47 30 52 25 22 22 64 7 50 17 34 31 21 22 64 7 47 17 42 22 23 21 70 7 51 19 48 23 22 21 70 7 49 19 42 24 22 22 68 7 51 12 38 24 25 22 71 7 48 19 44 25 23 22 68 8 51 13 40 23 22 22 72 8 44 25 52 16 19 22 70 8 44 15 49 12 21 20 78 8 45 13 46 10 22 20 80 8 47 20 56 9 20 21 78 8 49 12 50 10 22 22 82 8 49 10 51 8 47 13 56 8 52 10 56 8 51 10 53 6 24 21 86 6 21 20 84 6 24 22 87 6 23 24 87 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 26 5 27 5 28 5 29 5 2 5 5 5 5 5 3 4 5 6 9 4 83 38 100 18 41 39 77 4 91 39 102 27 42 41 75 4 95 34 109 20 43 45 79 4 99 26 106 17 45 47 83 5 99 23 95 23 46 43 81 5 100 22 102 22 46 47 82 5 97 22 103 16 40 43 84 5 111 36 136 9 55 52 85 5 80 17 89 9 38 37 87 5 82 24 84 20 37 39 79 5 101 21 105 15 47 43 85 5 93 20 99 16 44 44 84 5 98 19 93 24 43 41 82 5 105 11 106 12 45 47 90 5 101 17 92 28 44 45 81 5 104 16 83 41 45 45 77 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 12 5 13 5 14 5 15 5 18 5 19 5 20 5 21 5 22 5 25 5 26 5 27 5 28 5 29 5 5 5 5 5 5 2 3 4 5 6 9 4 50 66 68 47 17 16 51 4 49 63 69 44 17 18 52 4 45 63 70 38 17 19 53 4 45 56 58 45 17 17 50 4 50 57 65 40 22 22 54 4 47 53 59 41 19 18 53 4 53 48 55 43 24 21 54 4 54 41 43 50 26 24 52 4 58 44 57 46 27 26 56 4 64 44 77 31 29 29 65 4 67 40 73 32 30 28 66 4 62 59 91 27 25 26 64 4 78 27 93 13 35 34 81 4 71 37 100 6 32 34 80 5 96 28 119 5 81 37 111 5 75 39 113 5 69 34 102 5 73 30 99 5 83 38 116 5 87 33 111 5 83 39 119 5 98 33 130 5 72 44 113 5 90 32 120 3 47 45 87 8 39 38 81 5 35 34 81 2 32 32 83 3 34 37 84 3 42 38 83 7 40 40 83 4 38 40 82 0 42 45 87 1 33 35 80 3 42 42 86 Pos Yea Day MonHCoHIncVcorVInc HRftVRft % 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 5 18 5 19 5 20 5 23 5 24 5 25 5 26 5 27 5 30 5 31 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 2 3 7 8 9 5 121 21 101 40 54 55 78 5 92 23 75 38 40 42 73 5 116 23 87 48 48 48 74 5 51 5 62 5 60 5 59 2 40 14 24 20 85 9 57 13 27 29 84 9 44 24 25 25 76 9 46 23 28 25 77 Pos Yea Day MonHCoHIncVcorVInc HRftVRft % 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 7 7 7 7 7 7 5 9 5 10 5 13 5 14 5 15 5 16 5 17 5 20 5 21 5 5 5 5 3 7 8 9 6 77 21 87 10 34 35 84 6 78 21 87 11 35 37 84 6 79 16 74 20 35 36 81 6 87 13 90 9 38 38 89 6 81 15 86 10 35 38 87 6 81 10 76 16 36 35 86 6 48 13 54 8 21 23 83 6 65 16 64 17 31 31 80 6 57 15 65 6 71 13 5 26 25 86 9 47 Pos Yea Day MonHCoHIncVcorVInc HRftVRft % 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 5 14 5 15 5 16 5 17 5 20 5 21 5 22 5 23 5 24 5 27 5 28 5 29 5 30 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 4 5 6 7 8 6 78 27 54 53 32 31 62 6 77 14 63 27 31 32 77 6 89 12 66 36 37 37 76 6 85 21 78 28 39 38 77 6 90 18 76 33 38 39 76 6 79 15 74 19 36 35 82 6 105 16 92 30 47 48 81 6 67 19 70 17 30 30 79 6 62 14 58 19 27 29 78 6 63 14 56 23 28 29 76 6 72 19 76 15 31 32 81 6 57 14 43 30 24 25 69 6 61 14 43 30 30 27 70 7 60 15 58 16 26 28 79 7 58 14 54 20 28 27 77 7 68 16 73 10 32 33 84 7 61 13 58 17 27 27 80 7 71 10 58 23 32 32 80 7 66 8 58 17 31 31 83 7 66 14 53 25 27 27 75 7 67 13 59 22 31 29 78 7 72 17 59 27 29 29 75 7 69 16 64 23 29 31 77 7 76 18 77 18 35 33 81 7 81 5 78 10 32 32 91 7 87 10 86 11 38 36 89 7 75 10 70 17 32 33 84 7 77 8 63 26 30 31 80 7 87 3 78 13 34 33 91 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 5 12 5 13 5 14 5 15 5 18 5 20 5 21 5 22 5 25 5 26 5 27 5 28 5 29 5 2 5 5 5 5 4 5 6 9 4 94 49 52 90 33 32 51 4 86 59 65 81 30 30 52 4 88 77 74 90 34 35 49 4 97 68 94 72 42 42 58 4 90 51 78 65 41 43 59 4 68 37 57 49 31 31 59 4 58 32 54 38 26 24 62 4 71 46 70 50 31 32 59 4 37 13 26 28 17 16 61 4 32 25 35 18 15 14 61 4 74 43 67 51 35 35 60 4 81 31 60 51 41 37 63 4 71 33 73 31 36 34 69 5 77 35 74 37 36 37 68 5 22 7 17 14 9 9 65 5 60 18 58 21 28 29 75 5 37 8 26 19 17 16 70 5 55 21 55 23 25 27 71 5 60 40 52 45 28 28 57 5 70 27 57 41 32 32 65 5 98 42 84 54 48 47 65 5 52 20 49 27 22 24 68 5 89 40 77 51 43 44 65 5 94 37 70 61 46 46 63 5 39 20 32 25 20 18 61 5 130 38 80 91 62 59 62 5 65 21 44 46 27 28 62 5 130 44 82 92 60 60 61 5 107 61 75 89 49 49 55 5 94 62 72 86 42 42 53 5 107 74 101 82 50 49 57 5 124 57 100 82 58 57 62 5 116 69 91 93 54 54 56 5 121 72 106 88 59 58 59 6 104 44 90 57 49 51 66 6 45 21 43 23 18 22 67 6 70 43 62 51 31 30 58 6 64 28 59 34 31 27 66 6 88 35 84 37 42 44 70 6 87 42 87 41 41 44 68 6 94 39 87 48 44 47 68 6 102 35 82 55 50 49 67 6 50 26 44 32 23 20 62 6 84 34 70 45 38 40 66 6 83 21 75 31 38 37 75 6 44 13 49 7 20 20 82 6 51 19 44 23 21 22 69 6 77 30 62 43 33 34 66 6 37 6 23 17 15 13 72 6 41 13 32 23 17 18 67 6 57 14 47 22 27 25 74 6 44 15 44 14 17 19 75 7 37 12 37 13 17 16 75 7 72 23 68 28 34 33 73 7 59 19 52 22 26 25 73 Pos Yea Day MonHCoHIncVcorVInc HRftVRft % 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 5 5 8 9 6 87 20 102 6 86 19 97 4 40 40 89 4 37 41 89 Pos Yea Day MonHCoHIncVcorVInc HRftVRft % 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 5 5 7 8 7 26 7 21 8 27 8 21 9 13 13 76 7 8 5 74 8 13 14 80 9 17 18 76 7 20 21 82 1 6 9 89 6 22 19 84 4 13 14 83 6 15 14 79

5 10 5 13 5 14 5 15 5 16 5 17 5 20 5 21

6 91 18 98 10 40 40 87 6 93 19 94 16 44 42 84 6 107 15 108 12 48 50 89 6 80 14 85 9 34 34 88 6 91 15 94 10 43 42 88 6 108 25 118 13 49 49 86 6 97 22 109 8 44 43 87 6 102 20 110 10 48 46 88

5 11 5 12 5 13 5 14 5 18 5 20 5 21 5 22 5 25 5 26 5 27 5 28 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 3 4 5 8 9

7 61 13 54 15 28 26 80 7 30 7 31 7 41 18 46 7 45 14 52 7 17 4 22 7 46 14 56 7 35 11 40 7 32 13 39

5 119 24 100 43 53 51 77

7 60 26 75 12 27 26 78

5 60 9 54 13 23 25 84 5 58 12 47 22 26 24 76 6 107 29 105 28 45 46 79 6 81 12 76 17 35 37 84 6 64 6 46 25 27 28 78 6 100 17 89 29 45 43 80 6 111 21 107 24 45 46 83 6 110 11 99 20 47 47 87 6 80 11 75 18 34 37 84 6 51 6 50 6 109 17 117 6 23 22 89 8 47 46 90

9 76 11

5 11 5 12 5 13 5 14 5 15 5 18 5 19 5 20 5 21 5 22 5 25 5 26 5 27 5 28 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 3 4 5 8 9

6 51 22 17 57 15 15 46 6 66 37 36 68 21 25 49 6 41 11 21 30 16 16 60 6 34 39 26 48 10 12 41 6 40 35 26 50 14 15 44 6 37 32 18 52 11 13 40 6 44 12 23 36 16 15 58 6 42 27 28 41 15 13 51 6 42 21 26 35 15 14 55 6 43 24 26 40 16 15 52 6 36 17 22 29 15 16 56 6 39 28 25 41 14 15 48 6 34 38 48 24 13 13 57 6 32 24 31 25 15 13 56 6 37 29 39 25 14 12 58 6 37 16 32 19 15 15 66 6 35 39 50 26 13 15 57 6 42 18 36 22 14 16 66 7 32 25 37 22 14 12 59 7 40 23 40 24 16 15 63 7 34 23 38 22 16 15 62 7 41 10 28 25 16 15 66 7 43 9 28 24 19 17 68

7 28 10 28 7 15 12 77 7 42 18 42 18 21 18 70 7 48 12 40 18 24 20 75 8 33 13 33 12 13 11 73 8 56 14 58 12 26 26 81 8 57 15 58 13 25 24 80 8 40 14 41 14 18 16 74 8 65 32 70 28 28 29 69 8 65 14 68 8 86 26 105 8 73 24 89 9 31 30 85 6 40 38 86 9 35 35 83

5 10 5 13 5 14 5 15 5 16 5 17 5 20 5 21 5 22 5 23 5 24 5 27 5 28 5 29 5 30 5 5 5 5 5 1 4 5 6 7

5 91 22 53 60 33 32 64 5 76 15 59 31 32 32 75 5 89 9 67 32 37 37 79 5 75 6 51 30 31 29 78 5 67 17 53 30 27 28 72 5 60 10 62 10 27 29 86 5 61 5 73 5 62 5 62 5 56 5 70 5 61 5 36 5 32 5 50 5 49 5 55 5 52 6 56 6 54 6 50 6 55 6 59 6 57 6 57 6 62 6 30 6 59 6 62 6 31 6 65 6 53 6 68 9 55 17 29 26 82 6 62 16 32 33 86 6 45 22 25 24 79 1 38 25 25 27 79 1 21 33 20 20 69 4 23 52 22 22 62 9 29 42 22 23 64 4 23 15 16 15 76 2 19 14 14 13 76 7 32 24 21 22 73 3 25 25 21 20 73 6 37 23 24 23 76 8 54 7 24 25 88 9 50 14 23 23 82 5 45 14 25 22 84 6 46 10 21 22 86 2 49 10 23 24 90 3 46 13 24 23 87 3 45 16 24 21 84 4 45 14 22 22 85 6 51 16 25 23 84 0 25 1 52 2 59 1 29 4 64 4 53 4 71 5 12 12 92 8 24 24 93 5 26 26 95 3 10 11 94 4 23 25 94 5 21 19 92 4 24 28 95

5 10 5 13 5 14 5 15 5 16 5 17 5 20 5 21 5 22

6 112 16 115 13 50 48 89 6 104 19 104 17 48 46 85 6 100 11 92 19 44 44 86 6 52 12 53 11 24 22 82 6 114 11 112 14 51 50 90 6 127 20 126 20 53 52 86

5 11 5 12 5 13 5 14 5 15 5 18 5 19 5 20 5 21 5 22 5 12 5 13 5 14 5 15 5 18 5 19 5 20 5 21 5 27 5 28 5 29 5 5 5 5 5 5 2 3 4 5 6 9

5 10 5 11 5 12 5 13 5 16 5 17 5 18 5 19 5 20 5 23 5 24 5 25 5 26 5 27 5 30 5 31 5 1 5 5 5 5 2 3 7 8

5 10 5 11 5 15 5 16 5 17 5 18 5 5 5 5 3 7 8 9

8 72 23 85 10 32 34 83 8 61 26 71 14 29 29 77 8 40 9 44 5 18 16 86 8 58 19 64 11 26 27 80 6 30 27 17 37 8 6 42 8 55 9 48 9 57 9 54

6 28 19 24 23 10 6 26 21 19 28 6 6 36 12 19 30 10 6 29 8 11 26 10

4 66 43 59 52 25 28 57 4 55 81 94 43 24 28 55 4 64 56 87 29 32 31 64 4 64 53 94 21 32 31 68 4 68 54 110 11 31 32 73 4 63 25 82 6 28 29 82 4 38 9 37 10 19 17 80 4 51 15 57 11 25 25 81 4 60 13 58 17 29 28 80 4 78 29 93 14 37 37 80 4 78 29 86 18 33 36 78 5 92 24 99 15 43 43 83 5 88 23 85 24 36 38 79 5 91 9 81 20 37 39 86 5 99 13 101 12 40 43 89 5 100 18 96 23 45 46 83 5 90 11 94 7 38 38 91 5 95 26 100 22 42 42 80 5 102 17 113 6 44 47 90 5 104 21 112 15 46 47 86 5 92 15 91 15 42 42 86 5 117 10 109 18 54 51 89 5 97 15 103 9 42 42 89 5 94 10 82 21 42 39 85 5 98 11 80 28 43 40 82 5 101 5 42 9 90 19 42 41 87 6 36 10 18 16 83

5 10 5 11 5 12 5 13 5 16 5 17 5 18 5 19 5 20 5 23 5 24 5 25 5 26 5 27 5 30 5 31 5 1 5 5 5 5 2 3 7 8

5 64 10 38 32 28 25 71

5 10 5 11 5 15 5 16 5 17 5 18 5 19 5 12 5 13 5 14 5 15 5 18 5 19 5 20 5 21 5 22 5 25

5 10 5 13 5 14 5 15 5 16 5 20 5 22 5 23 5 24 5 27 5 28 5 29 5 30 5 5 5 5 5 5 1 4 5 6 7 8

6 34 18 23 27 13 12 56 6 30 15 20 22 10 8 57 6 30 15 18 29 11 9 52 6 27 20 19 26 11 9 50 6 26 44 39 31 10 10 46 6 35 26 31 29 11 12 55 6 32 16 24 23 13 13 59 6 38 6 20 24 16 14 66 6 33 8 32 10 12 12 78 9 11 13 75 7 3 2 70 6 31 13 36 6 12 1 7 6 34 7 34 7 43 7 42 7 44 7 41 7 48 7 39 7 35 7 37 7 41 7 40 7 34 7 51 7 45 7 39 7 44

8 54 14 60 10 22 24 83 8 55 7 53 8 26 24 88 8 53 9 49 13 20 22 82

5 8 5 11 5 12 5 13 5 14 5 15 5 18 5 19 5 20 5 21 5 22 5 25 5 26 5 27 5 28 5 5 5 5 5 1 3 4 5 8

7 41 11 30 21 16 16 69 7 42 14 41 16 16 16 73 7 37 21 33 27 15 16 59 7 41 20 41 21 17 18 67 7 41 22 42 22 19 17 65 7 35 18 36 15 16 16 68 7 37 16 37 16 16 16 70 7 38 27 41 24 15 16 61 7 40 20 37 23 16 16 64 7 32 11 31 10 15 16 75 7 39 12 32 17 18 16 71 7 37 10 27 21 15 14 67 7 38 13 26 24 16 15 63 7 35 8 29 15 15 15 74 7 43 10 23 27 17 16 64 8 40 12 31 22 18 17 68 8 39 8 24 23 16 16 67 8 42 20 30 33 17 17 58 8 37 13 28 25 17 16 63 8 48 17 34 31 18 17 63 8 39 8 24 23 17 17 67 8 44 11 30 23 17 18 69 8 40 19 31 30 16 16 59 8 40 13 30 27 18 17 64 6 62 29 28 61 18 18 50 6 61 32 43 51 24 23 56 6 66 48 48 68 27 29 50 6 55 68 65 57 23 23 49 6 51 26 39 37 21 20 59 6 64 39 51 50 30 27 56

4 68 65 67 65 26 24 51 4 58 65 70 54 22 26 52 4 60 57 61 54 26 26 52 4 55 60 65 53 25 26 52 4 61 56 78 41 27 26 59 4 82 44 97 28 37 36 71 4 80 55 111 25 35 34 70 4 86 33 106 13 38 41 81 4 73 50 105 14 34 34 74 4 93 31 108 16 44 42 81

5 9 5 10 5 13 5 14 5 15 5 16 5 17 5 20 5 21 5 22 5 5 5 3 7 8

5 74 38 103 10 35 34 79

4 24 13 13 14 77 7 26 13 13 13 75 6 32 19 16 16 75 3 31 15 16 15 80 3 29 17 17 17 78 3 26 20 14 14 74 2 29 21 16 16 77 4 25 19 15 13 74 3 27 12 13 13 81 3 24 20 16 14 73 3 33 13 16 17 82 6 34 14 15 15 79 1 22 13 15 14 80 0 33 17 16 17 83 2 35 11 19 17 86 7 29 18 16 16 73 3 35 11 17 17 85

5 10 5 11 5 12 5 13 5 16 5 17 5 18 5 19 5 20 5 23 5 24 5 26 5 27 5 30 5 31 5 5 5 5 5 1 2 3 7 8

5 10 5 11 5 12 5 13 5 16 5 17 5 18 5 19 5 20 5 24 5 25 5 26 5 27 5 30 5 31 5 1 5 5 5 2 3 7

5 9 5 10 5 13 5 14 5 15 5 16 5 20 5 22 5 23 5 27 5 28 5 29 5 30 5 5 5 1 4 6

5 11 5 12 5 13 5 14 5 15 5 18 5 19 5 20 5 21 5 22

6 45 50 48 47 16 16 49 6 61 53 59 55 18 19 53 6 52 55 54 56 20 20 49 6 57 42 59 43 21 24 58 6 58 46 63 40 24 24 58 6 51 41 49 42 22 23 55 6 50 45 45 51 20 22 50 6 48 36 46 37 22 23 56 6 54 22 40 38 25 23 61 6 50 47 46 51 22 22 49 6 46 61 58 45 19 19 50 6 50 41 49 41 22 23 55 6 50 43 59 35 23 25 58 6 54 35 68 24 25 23 67

5 98 22 111 10 44 46 87 5 72 19 77 13 34 33 82 5 82 31 97 18 38 38 79 5 35 11 36 8 17 17 79 5 60 26 72 16 27 27 76 5 45 13 53 5 76 16 84 5 88 24 107 5 73 18 88 6 54 14 65 6 76 16 85 6 62 20 76 6 71 20 85 6 56 12 64 5 23 22 84 7 36 36 87 6 39 40 87 5 37 34 88 2 27 25 88 4 37 36 89 5 30 27 85 5 33 36 86 2 24 27 90

5 9 5 10 5 13 5 14 5 15 5 16 5 17 5 20 5 21 5 22 5 23

5 9 5 10 5 11 5 15 5 5 5 5 3 7 8 9

5 70 10 69 10 28 28 87 5 92 18 97 9 38 39 88 5 78 13 72 18 34 34 83 5 87 14 92 8 42 37 89 5 97 15 96 15 39 39 87 6 97 17 104 8 45 42 89 6 75 20 92 6 82 15 94 6 37 8 44 1 36 34 89 5 37 37 90 1 17 17 90

5 10 5 11 5 12 5 13 5 16 5 17

5 10 5 13

