Chapter One: Introduction. 1.1: Heritage Buildings and Tourism. One could argue that there has been a resurgence of interest in heritage over recent years. Palmer (1999) purported that heritage became the `buzz' word of the 1990s. Indeed, heritage tourism is now regarded as being a highly significant and rapidly growing sector of tourism (Alzua, O'Leary & Morrison, 1998), making up a significant component of tourism in many developed countries (Garrod & Fyall, 2000). Despite the suggestion that heritage tourism is essentially an experiential product (for example, Beeho & Prentice, 1997), there is reportedly little information analysing the underlying behavioural structures of demand for heritage tourism and the experiential elements of heritage tourism (Chhabra, Healy & Sills, 2003). Exceptions to this include research conducted by Beeho & Prentice (1997); Prentice, Witt & Hamer (1998); McIntosh and Prentice (1999); McIntosh (1999); Hannabuss (1999); Prideaux & Kininmont (1999), among others, who have examined the experiential aspects of constructed heritage attractions or theme parks. An experiential product "refers to the intangible experience which tourist attractions provide to their consumers. Tourism is therefore consumed as experience" (Beeho & Prentice, 1997, p.75). Intangible experiences include the thoughts and feelings of consumers, and their reported narrative (Collier, 1999). More than ever before, consumers expect their tourism experiences to be of high quality (Janiskee, 1996). The importance of understanding in greater depth the heritage `consumer' and their experiences constitutes an important gap in heritage tourism research, especially in light of the fact that the global tourism market is becoming more competitive (Buhalis, 1998). Whilst previous studies such as those listed above have examined the heritage tourism experience within a range of constructed heritage settings, an understanding of the experience gained in townscape settings, and the contribution of tangible aspects, such as buildings within the built townscape setting has not been widely examined within previous research efforts. Indeed, this area of neglect requires attention, as certain buildings within a built townscape can become important heritage resources to a tourism

1

destination. Yet, many are also neglected for preservation. There is a need, therefore, for a greater depth of understanding of the relationship between heritage buildings and tourism. For the purpose of this thesis, heritage buildings can be defined as being those buildings that are regarded as representing shared roots and the origins of our identities or belongings. They may be regarded as being meaningful to a national or regional history (Gordon, 2004). The term heritage building was used for this research, rather than New Zealand's leading heritage agency, The New Zealand Historic Places Trust's (NZHPT) broader definition of `historic places', which includes bridges, pas, shipwrecks and many other types of heritage (NZHPT, 2005). As this research focuses on buildings of significant heritage importance, a more concise definition was sought, and thus adopted. New Zealand has a large number of heritage buildings which are considered important tourism resources, because it is believed that these buildings are of high interest to what Tourism New Zealand describes as a highly desirable target market; the interactive traveller (Tourism New Zealand, nd). However, despite their perceived high value to New Zealand tourism, many of these buildings are said to be under threat from development pressures, neglect, or the wear of time, and one is not aware of the valuable role these buildings may play in telling the story of New Zealand to international visitors (NZHPT, 2005). It has been estimated in the Colmar Brunton Demand for Cultural Tourism Report 2003, that 61% of international visitors and 22% of domestic tourists experienced one or more heritage buildings during their holiday in New Zealand in 2003 (Tourism New Zealand, 2003). Despite this, very little research exists relating to the manner and extent to which heritage buildings contribute to the experiences of international tourists while they are visiting New Zealand. As mentioned above, from an experiential perspective, in order to satisfy visitors, tourist attractions need to understand their visitors in terms of the experiences they seek and gain (McIntosh & Siggs, 2005). An important part of this analysis may be their expectations and ensuing narrative. This thesis aims to address the lack of experiential research conducted within built townscape settings by assessing the influence of heritage buildings in shaping the nature of experiences gained by international tourists in a case study region of New Zealand;

2

Hawke's Bay. The region selected as the case study for this research is Hawke's Bay due to its high concentration of heritage buildings as a tourism product offering. As it is likely that the experiences of New Zealand's heritage buildings will be different for domestic and international tourists, this thesis purposely focuses only on the experiences of international tourists. As noted above, international tourists are a key market for visiting heritage buildings in New Zealand. The specific tangible and intangible attributes of the heritage buildings that contribute to the experiences gained by international tourists will also be determined. Research methods to advance the understanding of the relationship between heritage buildings and tourism are also considered, such as the use of photography to elicit tourists' narratives. This research will also apply contingent valuation methodology to provide an analysis of the willingness to pay of respondents to preserve Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings; thus indicating a level of relative importance to the worth of heritage buildings to regional tourism, as perceived amongst international tourists visiting the region. 1.2: Research Aims and Objectives. The main aim of this thesis is to gain a deeper understanding of the influences of heritage buildings in shaping the nature of experiences gained by international tourists visiting the Hawke's Bay region. The three specific objectives that guided this thesis were as follows: To explore the influence of heritage buildings in shaping international tourists' experiences of Hawke's Bay; To gain insight into the specific attributes of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings that influenced the experiences of international tourists visiting the region; To examine the relative importance of heritage buildings for international tourism to Hawke's Bay, as perceived by international tourists visiting the region.

3

1.3: Contributions of Thesis Research. This research is much needed in terms of meeting key priorities identified by The Tourism Research and Development Strategy 2002, and The New Zealand Tourism Strategy 2010 (NZTS). The latter document in particular is of significant importance for New Zealand tourism, as it contains a comprehensive list of principles, objectives and enablers to promote sustainable development of the country's tourism industry to 2010 (Ministry of Tourism, 2001). Specific priorities addressed by this research include: · Assess the importance of New Zealand's cultural and historical based products with the aim to "differentiate New Zealand in the global marketplace" (NZTS, 2010, p.32); · Encourage regional differentiation, and to assist in tourism growth by "increasing yield, addressing seasonality and regional spread issues" (NZTS, 2010, p.32.), and · Recognise the `customer' perspective in all tourism research. (NZTS, 2010).

The contribution of this thesis research to the above tourism sector priorities was made evident when this research was awarded a Ministry of Tourism Masters Scholarship to fund the research. In an academic context, there is a need to enhance our understanding of the motivations and thought patterns of tourists (Johnson & Thomas, 1992). As previously mentioned there is a paucity of experiential information relating to the consumption of heritage products, especially in townscape settings generally. Experiential information is important because in order to identify and prioritise important heritage assets for tourism, and to inform cultural development from a demand perspective, there is an essential need to understand the value of historical and cultural resources to tourists in their experience of a destination (Johnson and Thomas, 1990). As Poria, Butler & Airey (2001) explain, an increased understanding of the thought patterns of visitors can help heritage

4

management with a wide range of issues, such as determining pricing policy, accomplishing the mission of the business and creating products that better meet the wants of visitors. Essentially, an increased understanding of heritage visitor characteristics can help heritage management "to work with the visitor, rather than against the visitor" (Hall & McArthur, 1998, p.105). Examining the experiences of visitors in built townscapes, rather than just constructed heritage attraction settings, allows a more complete picture and wider story to be told. As such, the contribution of heritage assets to tourism is not merely attributed to the heritage enthusiast. It enables a wider and richer discourse of the relationship between heritage buildings and tourism to emerge. On a regional level, within Hawke's Bay, the case study location for this thesis research, Napier City Council and Hastings District Council are concerned that heritage buildings and items within the Central Business District (CBD) remain at risk and there is a possibility of inappropriate development within the CBD. As such, a heritage inventory is currently being compiled by The New Zealand Historic Places Trust to list valued heritage buildings within the CBD (NZHPT, 2005). Additionally, The Art Deco Trust, which promotes the tourism potential, preservation, and restoration of Art Deco and related style buildings, collects up to date information on the types of tourists that visit Art Deco buildings, and their expectations and evaluations of these buildings within the Hawke's Bay region. In 2002, The Art Deco Trust conducted research looking at the profile of `the Art Deco tourist'. It was acknowledged then that further research is required to build on this profile (Art Deco Trust, 2002b). In particular, a threat discussed in the 2002 `SWOT' profile was that small inappropriate details about the Art Deco product could damage tourists' heritage experiences (ibid). By understanding the nature of experiences international tourists gain through the presence of heritage buildings within the townscapes they visit, this research can serve to affirm support for their identification, listing, retention, preservation and potential development for tourism use. An increase of interest in the buildings for tourism purposes is seen to result in increased numbers interested in their preservation (Robert McGregor, pers comm., 2005).

5

1.4: Thesis Outline. This thesis is divided into eight chapters. The introductory chapter sets the context for this thesis research; its contribution to scholarly and sector knowledge; its' aims and objectives. Chapter Two provides a background to the case study region. Specifically, it examines the historical context of heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay. Chapter Three discusses the importance of experiential research to tourism studies and reviews previous literature to examine the relationship between heritage buildings and tourism. The literature review covers a wide spectrum of literature, from a variety of disciplines, including tourism, culture, heritage and architectural studies. Chapter Three defines heritage, and explains its meaning to this research context. Chapter Four presents the methodology adopted for the thesis research, in order to meet the specific research aims listed in 1.2. Further to this, it discusses the benefits of combining qualitative and quantitative research techniques, and why a mixed methodology approach was selected as the most appropriate method for this research. Recent applications in research methodology, such as the use of photographs, will also be discussed in the context of the thesis research conducted. Findings of the research conducted are presented and discussed in Chapters Five and Six. Chapter Five presents the results of the qualitative research methods, and examines the experiences of international tourists visiting Hawke's Bay from their narrative, and the place and influence of heritage buildings within these narratives. Chapter Six presents the results of the structured questionnaire and determines the attributes of heritage buildings that were found to be most interesting among the international tourists surveyed. Chapter Seven presents the results of the contingent valuation analysis, and discusses the relative importance of heritage buildings for international tourism to the region. Chapter Eight provides a conclusion that summarises the main findings of the research, their significance for academic discourse and their possible implications for tourism in the region, and in wider contexts. Suggestions for future research will also be made in this chapter.

6

Chapter Two: Literature Review. A significant amount of heritage tourism literature to date has focused on the role of heritage in society, cultural and heritage markets, planning, interpretation, community involvement and issues of authenticity (Alzua et al, 1998). However, there is still little known about the consumer of heritage. In particular, there is a paucity of research analysing the nature of the relationship between factors such as visitor characteristics, visitor behaviour, motivations and the experiential nature of heritage tourism (Kerstetter, Confer & Graefe, 2001). Hall & McArthur (1998) add that in heritage literature, "only limited attention has been given to the human dimension"(p.8). This is a significant gap in scholarly knowledge, as increased demand for heritage products requires a more indepth understanding of visitor characteristics. It is important to recognise that "it is the human dimension that gives rise to heritage resources" (Hall & McArthur, 1998, p.8). This chapter provides a review of the published literature pertinent to the relationship between heritage buildings, consumers and tourism. It will start by discussing what constitutes heritage, and the increased focus on heritage tourism. The relationship between heritage buildings and tourism will then be examined, with a particular emphasis on how heritage buildings can form a prominent part of the tourist gaze. The experiential elements of tourism will then be examined; their importance; guiding theories; and previous studies into heritage tourism experiences. In particular, the review will reveal gaps in the literature, such as the lack of experiential research into heritage tourism and in particular the experiences gained from townscapes; the latter will be addressed by this thesis. 2.1: The Importance of Heritage Tourism. It has been argued that "heritage tourism is one of the trump cards for this industry of the future" (Frangialli, 2002). Indeed, Graham (2002) comments that both tangible and intangible aspects of heritage are "the single most important resources for international tourism" (p.1007). An increased interest in heritage tourism is said to be important,

7

because heritage resources can assist in achieving sustainable tourism development, as they are often shared public goods, which generally can be experienced by large numbers of visitors with little resulting environmental damage (Frangialli, 2002; McKercher & du Cros, 2002). However, despite the perceived importance of heritage tourism, it remains a difficult concept to define (Li, 2003). Indeed, Gordon (2004) believes heritage itself is a word far too ambiguous to allow for simple definition. Fyall and Garrod (1998) define heritage tourism as an economic activity that makes use of socio-cultural assets to attract visitors, while Poria et al (2001) add that heritage tourism is "a phenomenon based on visitors' motivations and perceptions rather than a specific site or attribute" (p.1047). Zeppel and Hall (1991) also note the importance of consumers' perceptions and define heritage tourism as being "based on nostalgia for the past and the desire to experience diverse cultural landscapes and forms" (p.49). Graham (2002) suggests that heritage is that part of the past, which is selected in the present for contemporary purposes. The term heritage tourism has also been used to describe the experiences pursued by, and motivators of, tourists (Alzua et al, 1998). In short, the definitions of heritage tourism have traditionally been based around consumer motivations. Indeed, with respect to the demand for heritage tourism, interest in visiting heritage sites has increased rapidly recently and is expected to continue (Kerstetter et al, 2001). Many researchers have sought reasons for heritage tourism's popularity and why people choose to visit heritage attractions. What they all tend to agree is that tourists are now eager for more cultural and heritage experiences (Hall, 1995; Alzua et al, 1998; Waitt, 2000; Kerstetter et al, 2001; Chandler & Costello, 2002). In particular, Hall (1995) argues that the boom in interest in heritage tourism has been fuelled by changes in consumer preferences for quality specialist-interest products, with a particular emphasis placed on attending heritage attractions where enjoyable experiences or activities can be participated in. Waitt (2000) adds that more tourists now visit heritage sites due to factors such as greater affluence and leisure time and the desire to experience the past in order to compensate for deficiencies in today's experiences. Thus, there is a need for case studies consisting of differing heritage resources and settings in order to determine and compare the experiences consumers gain from them. A focus on consumer experiences is

8

important, as it is argued that for a destination to develop, managers must understand the experiences tourists are likely to gain at their, as well as competing destinations (Beeho & Prentice, 1997). Within the published literature to date, there have been a number of key considerations regarding heritage. Predominantly, previous studies have focused on issues of preservation and curatorship (Garrod, Willis, Bjarnadottir & Cockbain, 1996; Navrud & Ready, 2002; Howard & Pinder, 2003; Li, 2003; Farrell & Twining-Ward, 2005; Majumbar, 2005; Salazar & Marquez, 2005), the question of whose heritage is being preserved and consumed (Meethan, 1996; Grant, 1998; McIntosh & Prentice, 1999; Fisher, 2000; 2002; Waitt, 2000; Poria, Butler & Airey, 2004b), the commodification and presentation of history (Zeppel & Hall, 1991; Tannock, 1995; Goulding, 1999; Waitt, 2000; Hyounggon, 2005), the management of heritage and the role of stakeholder groups (Prentice et al, 1993; Swarbrooke, 1994; Hall & McArthur, 1998; Garrod & Fyall, 2000; Greffe, 2004), and the role of the community in preserving and promoting heritage (Balcar & Pearce, 1996; Nuryanti, 1996; Hall & McArthur, 1998; Caffyn & Lutz, 1999). There have also been numerous studies analysing heritage values and benefits gained by visitors (Prentice, 1993; Powe & Willis, 1996; Hall & McArthur, 1998; McIntosh, 1999; Jewell & Crofts, 2001). Whilst these considerations are prominent in the literature and important for heritage tourism management, they have not yet yielded experiential information to put consumer considerations to the fore. Different aspects of heritage have also been considered in the literature; for example, industrial (Prentice, 1993; Arwel Edwards & Llurds i Coit, 1996; Caffyn & Lutz, 1999), religious (Rinschede, 1992; Munsters, 1996; Surez, Sendra & Leon, 2005), and cultural heritage (Alzua et al, 1998; Graham, 2002; Howard & Pinder, 2003; Salazar & Marquez, 2005). However, there is a paucity of literature considering the role of the townscape within the tourism experience. 2.2: The Relationship Between Buildings and Tourism. It is well acknowledged that when tourists consider destination choice, they search for destinations that they perceive will provide them with unique and pleasurable experiences (Pine & Gilmore, 1995; Meethan, 1996; Howard, 2000). Indeed, what is important to a 9

tourism region now is a point of difference. Howard (2000) argues that rapid globalisation has led to many countries becoming very similar to each other and there is an increasingly apparent desire from many people "to strengthen their national, provincial or local distinctiveness" (p.7). This sentiment is shared by other scholars who make references to the commodification and homogenisation of tourism products (Richards & Wilson, Article in Press). Pine and Gilmore (1995) add that the provision of goods and services are no longer enough and destinations must differentiate their products through facilitating engaging experiences for consumers. Meethan (1996) similarly argues there has been a change in consumer consumption behaviour; that there has been a move away from demand for mass-marketed tourism to more individualised experiences, leading destinations to actively seek to position themselves as attractive places of experiential consumption. As such, it can be argued that the urban environment itself becomes a commodity to be bought and sold by consumers (ibid). It has been argued that the value-added and experiential element of heritage assets such as heritage buildings can significantly help a region to differentiate itself (Howard, 2000). Kierchoff (1996) comments that "architecturally, tourism facilities all over the world look almost alike... this now universal tourism design and ambiance contributes to a depressing atmosphere, which is exactly the opposite of what people are looking for when going on holidays" (p.249-250). A national poll conducted in Britain confirmed that the majority of British people "love heritage buildings and dislike modern architecture" (CMP Information Limited, 2004, p.4). Perhaps for this reason, coupled with the increased desire for distinctive experiences, architectural tourism is becoming an important niche form of worldwide tourism. `Architourism' is one of the latest global tourism trends (Lasanky, 2004). It is argued that a wide variety of groups associated with buildings such as architects and city planners cannot afford to be unaware of the `twists and turns' of the complexities of tourism (Greenwood, 2004). It is argued that architects need to understand the intricacies of tourist behaviour, and in particular, the nature of the experiences and images tourists take from a particular destination (ibid). Indeed, it is argued that through architecture, defined

10

as "a style of building or structure" (McCleod, 1988, p.47), a wide range of personal emotions can be evoked (Küller, 1980). Yet only recently have architectural historians begun to assess the role played by tourism in the history of the built environment (Lasanky, 2004). The built environment is also of considerable importance to the `experiencescape' of a tourist destination. O'Dell (2005) argues that spaces in which experiences are created and consumed, such as destinations can be termed `experiencescapes'. These can be viewed as landscaped spaces and elicit the notion that every surrounding that is encountered by tourists takes the form of "physical, as well as imagined landscapes for experience" (p.16). It is argued that, in reality, when tourists are selecting destinations to travel, or activities to partake in, what they are actually seeking are satisfying experiencescapes (O'Dell, 2005). As confirmed by previous experiential studies (for example, Moscardo, 1996; Otto & Ritchie, 1996; McIntosh & Prentice, 1999; McIntosh & Siggs, 2005), experiences are very personal and individual tourists will have different experiences even if they participate in exactly the same activities. Thus, it is important to ensure that a tourist attraction, or indeed a destination generally, induces a variety of pleasurable experiences to individuals (Seng Ooi, 2005). Consequently, within architectural realms, the preferences of increasing numbers of tourists and how their demands may be changing must be understood (Greenwood, 2004). Allsopp (1974) purports that it is peoples' description of how architecture affects their senses that should be of paramount importance to all interested stakeholders in architecture, heritage, urban planning and tourism. If this is to be achieved, it is important to understand the specific attributes of buildings that are attractive to visitors. "Is it the sheer brilliance of the architect, the urban location, or something else?" (Greenwood, 2004, p.18). It may be argued therefore that a destination needs to understand the complexities of thought and emotion visitors have regarding the architecture of the region in order to develop and maximise tourism potential through sustained use of favoured buildings and future architectural developments (ibid). Indeed, it is true that, for some, the true experience of heritage buildings is simply the pleasure of viewing something pleasing to the eye (Scruton, 1979). However, it is not reasonable to suggest that aesthetic experiences are the only types of experiences visitors receive from buildings. For many,

11

architecture reportedly allows them to use their imagination and, as such, can create a wide variety of experiences (ibid); experiences that are complex, emotionally engaging, and potentially rich in narrative and personal meaning. For instance, Willis (1999) writes that modern human lives lack "fulfilment, significance, spirituality and a sense of belonging" (p.14). It is believed that some individuals may view historic architecture to account for these gaps (Willis, 1999). There is thus a necessity for more in-depth research at destinations looking into the built attributes that are of most interest to visitors, and how these attributes affect their experiences of the region and their experiencescapes. It is well argued in the scholarly literature that architecture's primary role is to give people personal meaning of the structures and locations around them (for example, Willis, 1999). To comprehensively interpret the relationship between specific architecture and human thought, it is necessary to analyse how visitors interpret their `experiencescape' (Scruton, 1979; O'Dell, 2005). In other words, it is of importance to determine a visitor's wider perception of a region and, indeed, where the architectural experiences fit into this. Indeed, Urry (2002) argues that the built environment can form a substantial part of tourists' perceptions of regions. He argues that when people travel to new destinations, they look upon it with interest and curiosity; in other words, they gaze at their surroundings. Li (2003) adds that the tourist gaze is a significant theme of modern consumer behaviour and tourists' experiences depend on particular objects upon which they gaze. It is said that the built environment can constitute a significant part of tourists' gazes (Urry, 2002; Li, 2003), and their interpretations of experiencescapes (O'Dell, 2005). While it is argued that many tourists do not plan to visit a region solely to gaze at the built environment (Griffiths, 2000), Urry (2002) agrees that there is an emphasis on the visual elements of tourists' experiences, and as such, buildings can become significant in terms of where the tourist gaze is directed. Heritage buildings can seem appropriate to place and cause viewers to mark that place off from others. An area that has common buildings is argued to generate `placelessness' and is therefore argued to be unlikely to attract large amount of tourists who wish to "gaze upon the distinct" (Urry, 2002, p.115). Furthemore, Li (2003) argues that central to tourists' consumption behaviour is the act of looking at aspects of landscapes or townscapes that are distinct,

12

and provide experiences that contrast with the everyday. Indeed, the gaze of townscapes can be so prominent that cities can become identified with certain buildings (Griffiths, 2000), and thus, a number of people gaze upon buildings simply to say that the visit was made, and the item was seen (Urry, 2002). However, buildings will be viewed from different perspectives and constructed according to differing cultural interpretations. Indeed, tourists and locals are likely to experience differences in the way they `see' a place. What may look quaint and pleasant for one person may look decayed and uninviting for another (Wright, 1985). For instance, although it is stated that more than 1.3 million people visit Australia's Parliament House buildings per annum, a number of parliamentary workers feel the buildings offer little as a tourist attraction (Griffiths, 2000). Fisher (2002) also concluded that different values were placed on heritage buildings between locals and tourists in Levuka, Fiji; as locals felt that heritage was not to be found in buildings, but in the land (vanua). Indeed, Hall & McArthur (1998) argue that "heritage values are human values" (p.17), and many of the problems with heritage management and preservation are caused through not understanding the views of stakeholders, such as tourists, towards heritage. Furthermore, it is argued that the tourist gaze will not be the same amongst different cultures, or indeed social groups (Urry, 2002). As such, research grounded in the realities tourists themselves describe (Prentice et al, 1998), analysing the differences in how tourists gaze upon heritage in different settings is of importance. 2.3: The Experiential Elements of Tourism. As previously touched upon, a number of researchers advocate the nature of experiences constructed as being paramount to a successful tourism industry. For instance, De Cauter (1995) purports that modern society characterises an `experience hunger,' whereby people are becoming increasingly willing to visit places or participate in activities simply for the experiential elements they provide. Similarly, Pine and Gilmour (1995) argue that there has been a growth in the `experience economy,' with consumers spending more to gain pleasurable experiences. Prentice et al (1993) further argue that heritage sites produce experiences rather than tangible products and it is these diverse experiences that

13

are in competition for tourists' demand; and Richards and Wilson (Article in press) similarly argue that successful tourism destinations must create "a distinctive place image or experience in an increasingly crowded global market place" (p.2). Wilson (2002) continues, adding the tourism potential of a region is not solely based on the physical assets, but on the quality of the experiences built around those assets, generally extending to the `living culture' and atmosphere of the place. Ultimately, therefore, regions must be aware that there is now a heavy demand for experiences and must seek to offer travellers an experience based on difference. Experience can be defined as "the subjective mental state felt by participants during a service encounter" (Otto & Ritchie, 1996, p.166) or "events that engage individuals in a personal way" (Bigne & Andreu, 2004, p.692). Thus, `experience' can be viewed as the subjective mental state felt by individuals (Beeho & Prentice, 1997; Palmer, 2004). For instance, one consumer may view a certain heritage attraction as having world significance, while others may gain different, more personally imbued experiences of the heritage. Tourists' assessments of a destination or attraction can be influenced by such factors as age, gender, and country of origin (Palmer, 2004). Hence, previous heritage tourism research has tended to distinguish between the experiences of different types of tourists; for example, international and domestic tourists, and between demographic types. Understanding the experiential elements of tourism, including feelings, sensations and consumer thoughts is now being recognised as an important topic for investigation, as tourism experiences in general have gone from being "simply a value adding aspect of more concrete goods and services, to valued commodities in and of themselves," (O'Dell, 2005, p.13). Indeed, it is argued that consumer researchers have now turned their attention to exploring the emotional and evaluative components of the consumption experience (Havlena & Holbrook, 1986). While consumer experiences vary in their level of objective/subjective, utilitarian/hedonic and tangible/intangible elements (Holbrook, Lehmann & O'Shaughnessy, 1986), it is argued that the more emotional aspects of consumption experiences occur in almost all consumption activities (Havlena &

14

Holbrook, 1986). Consumption of experiences relating to situations such as extreme leisure activities (Arnould & Price, 1993; Fluker & Turner, 2000) and movie going (Fiskee & Handel, 1947) has featured in previous marketing research. However, there is a need to understand the nature of in-depth consumer experiences in a tourism context, and how the experiential aspects gained from consumption add to the overall tourism experience. Yet, there remains a significant gap in the literature looking at the more individualised, personal meanings that tourists place on heritage (Timothy, 1997). Although, exceptions exist as experiential research in tourism gains momentum. 2.4: Previous Research into Tourists' Heritage Experiences. It is only when the nature of experiences are known that the managers of attractions can use deductive approaches appropriately (Prentice et al, 1998). As such, heritage operators like other tourism operators must collect up to date information about tourists' experiences, as they are "highly personal, subjectively perceived, intangible, ever fleeting and continuously ongoing," (O'Dell, 2005, p.15). Indeed, research shows that visitors to attractions seek certain psychological benefits and these benefits directly impact on satisfaction (Cole & Scott, 2004). Managers must know what benefits visitors are looking for, and indeed what benefits their attraction is actually providing in order to deliver satisfactory tourism experiences. Within the published tourism literature, there has been a growing attention placed on examination of the experiential elements of tourism (McIntosh & Siggs, 2005). However, it is surprising that despite tourism being an essentially experiential product, there has been relatively little attention focused on what tourists consume and experience, outside of North American studies, although the number of experiential studies in tourism has grown since the mid 1990's (Beeho & Prentice, 1997). Furthermore, the North American studies have relied predominantly on quantitative measures. Studies of tourists' experiences are increasingly looking to tap into the more subjective elements of a tourist's experience (e.g. Galani-Moutafi, 2000; McIntosh & Prentice, 1999), and as such there is now a move towards qualitative research approaches towards the study of

15

experiences. In particular, an inductive approach is recommended when researching tourists' experiences, to ensure that social and personal connections are not assumed, but instead are shaped by respondents in their own words (Beeho & Prentice, 1997; Prentice et al, 1998); thus eliciting `thick' descriptions of tourists' experiences. Within a heritage tourism context, previous experiential research has measured the key dimensions of tourists' experiences in natural (Schanzel & McIntosh, 2000; Chettri, Arrowsmith & Jackson, 2004) and other heritage environments (Masberg & Silverman, 1996; Moscardo, 1996; Beeho & Prentice, 1997; McIntosh & Prentice, 1999; Prentice et al, 1998). There have also been studies of the relationship visitors have with a wide range of heritage buildings including those of religious (Rinschede, 1992; Munsters, 1996), historical (Griffiths, 2000), stately (McDonald, 2000), and commercial (McIntosh & Siggs, 2005) significance. These studies conclude that tourists gain distinct experiences through differing types of heritage buildings. For instance, Rinschede (1992) found that religious buildings allow spaces for which tourists can develop their faith and find peace. McIntosh & Siggs (2005) found that heritage buildings operating as boutique accommodation allowed tourists to gain a `novelty' experience. Studies such as these allude to the fact that there are a wide range of experiences that can be gained by tourists through partaking in heritage consumption. Thus, a focus on visitor experiences can illuminate differences between how visitors engage with a building and this can have implications for the management of certain types of heritage buildings. However, despite this, there remains a lack of research on the experiences gained by tourists through the presence of heritage buildings, and particularly from the presence of heritage buildings in the wider townscape. While it is argued that different heritage buildings present different experiential offerings to tourists, from a review of the published literature, there appears to be a number of experiences gained by tourists that are common to heritage attractions. Hall and McArthur (1998) found that heritage attractions can provide visitors with the opportunity to "use heritage as a means of contemplating, reflecting and discovering what is important to them" (p.87). Squire (1994) adds that heritage tourism can take people back

16

to a time when civilisation was more innocent and sought simpler pleasures. Rinschede (1992) purported that tourists often gain a nostalgic experience from visiting religious buildings. It is also apparent that a number of visitors gain experiences by visiting heritage attractions that have nothing to do with the attraction itself. For instance, Verbeke and Rekon's (1996) study of visitors to museums identified that tourists gained experiences such as `an escape from daily routine' and `the enjoyment of being in open air'. Clearly, neither of these experiences had anything to do with the actual collection of heritage items within the museum. It is thus important to determine whether it is the actual heritage that creates interest, or simply the activities associated with it. However, from a review of the literature, it appears that the two most common types of experiences people are seeking when visiting heritage attractions focuses on education (the tourist's willingness to learn) and entertainment (the tourist's desire to be entertained) (Poria, Butler & Airey, 2004b). It is argued that even `non-visitors' to heritage attractions can gain experiences through being in heritage-based townscapes, through means such as a perceived improved atmosphere and the ability to gaze on the distinct (Urry, 2002). What is needed is an understanding of visitor expectations and experiences. Furthermore, authenticity poses an important question for constructed heritage attractions and townscapes alike. The question to be asked is, do tourists wish to see how a culture lives now, or how they used to live in the past? (Fisher, 2000). With modern times, progress must be made, and thus it is unlikely that heritage buildings will remain completely `authentic' to their original time period. Particularly in `living cities', it becomes difficult for a region to determine how much of the past to place on show for tourists (Fisher, 2000). Dovey (1985) uses the example of window shutters of heritage buildings that have been changed over time, and asks, "at what stage do they become inauthentic?" She concludes by saying they have to be connected to the past in some way for them to maintain their authenticity. Thus, when renovating heritage buildings, care must be taken to ensure the spirit of the past is maintained. Indeed, this is the view held by Fitch (1995), who argued that a number of Japanese heritage buildings, despite being rebuilt incorporating modern materials, are not compromised authentically, as their spirit was still perceived to be maintained. Fisher (2000) continues, stating that it is not unusual

17

for a culture `to borrow' ideas from other cultures. However, particularly for Europeans, if that idea was borrowed from European culture, that culture becomes inauthentic. It can be argued then, that wherever possible, a region must keep what is unique about its culture intact, in order to appeal to tourists. As to how these experiences may differ from those gained in constructed attractions remains to be evaluated. 2.5 Understanding Tourists' Experiences Through their Narratives. In the pursuit of understanding tourists' experiences of heritage settings, tourists' indepth experiences can be revealed through their narratives (Noy, 2004). Löfgren (2004) adds that the strong narrative elements of tourists' experiences are revealed through the sharing of memories, or telling of stories. Narratives and the description of a destination have been described as consisting of impressions, perceptions and the overall mental picture or stereotype of a place or area (Pearce, 1988). Narrative analysis is an interdisciplinary approach, which can provide insight into how lived experiences interact with wider societal processes (Trapp-Fallon, 2002). Narrative interviewing is particularly pertinent to the study of heritage experiences, as in essence, personal narratives allow the core experiences gained by tourists to be determined (Li, 2003). As previously discussed, experiences are argued to be the core product of heritage tourism, and thus, determining these core experiences is of importance. Furthermore, when tourists tell stories about themselves, it is argued that their experiential encounters combine to form an intelligent, communicable story of identity and biography (Gergen, 1999). A number of researchers have undertaken experiential research utilising narrative analysis (for example, Noy, 2004; Gyimóthy & Mykletun, 2004). These researchers found that narrative analysis allowed for a number of experiential themes to be developed. For instance, Gyimóthy and Mykletun's (2004) narrative study of Arctic experiences found that tourists gained experiences of `fun', `adventure' and `exploration'. Similarly, Noy (2004) believed narrative analysis used in his study of Israeli backpackers allowed the research aim of establishing the in-depth experiences of backpackers to be met. Narrative interviews allowed the major finding that Israeli backpackers experienced `self-change' to be determined.

18

While the use of narratives has been used in a number of experiential studies, a wide range of alternative methods have also been used in previous studies. For example, Beeho & Prentice (1997) and Schanzel & McIntosh (2000) utilised ASEB (Activities, Settings, Experiences, Benefits) grid analysis in their study of tourists' experiences. It is argued that this analysis is essentially a refinement of conventional SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats) used in strategic planning business management (Schanzel & McIntosh, 2000). Indeed, it is argued that heritage tourism research can be approached from a wide range of applications, because heritage sites can be quite unique from other leisure and tourism attractions (Ateljevic, Harris & Wilson, 2005). As such, in addition to further understanding the nature of experiences within townscapes, researchers need to examine the way in which such experiences are captured. 2.6 Chapter Conclusion. A review of published literature denotes a significant relationship between heritage buildings and tourism. It has been argued that heritage buildings are particularly important for regional differentiation, and often form a substantial part of tourists' gazes of places (Urry, 1992), although this lacks empirical investigation. Furthermore, the resurgence of interest in heritage has led to `architourism' becoming, arguably, one of the fastest growing sectors of tourism (Lasanky, 2004). This trend, combined with the growth of what Pine and Gilmore (1995) call the experience economy, whereby people are reportedly searching for more satisfying experiences, has led to the realisation that the study of experiential elements is an important research topic (Prentice et al, 1998). However, there remains a lack of research looking into the manner in which heritage buildings, as part of a wider townscape, fit into tourists' narratives of the experiencescapes of regions. Furthermore, although it is argued there are a number of experiences, such as nostalgia, that are common to most heritage attractions, there is a need to determine unique experiences that tourists' gain from built townscapes generally. It is of importance to determine the nature of tourists' experiences, as in a crowded tourism market, there is a need to offer tourism destinations based on experiential differences (Meethan, 1996). This thesis research is thus of value to tourism knowledge,

19

as it addresses the lack of experiential research into tourists' experiences outside of North American studies (Beeho & Prentice, 1997), and looks at the under-researched topic of the relationship between heritage buildings and the experiences gained by international tourists in a wider townscape. The townscape used as a case study for this thesis will now be overviewed in Chapter Three prior to discussing the research methods employed in Chapter Four.

20

Chapter Three: Research Context. 3.1 Introduction. This chapter will discuss the nature and importance of the use of heritage buildings for tourism in New Zealand as the wider context for the thesis research. This chapter will also provide a background of the heritage industry in the case study region: Hawke's Bay. In particular, it will build a profile of the region, and explain why it was selected as the case study for this research. 3.2: Heritage Buildings and Tourism in New Zealand. Heritage places and buildings are important resources for heritage tourism in New Zealand. The New Zealand Historic Places Trust: Pouhere Taonga (NZHPT) is the main governmental organisation whose activities relate to the recognition, protection and promotion of New Zealand's historic and cultural heritage (NZHPT, 2005). The NZHPT notes that a historic place may be deemed significant if it possesses "aesthetic, archaeological, architectural, cultural, historical, scientific, social, spiritual, technological or traditional significance or value" (NZHPT, 2001). Often places deemed significant receive funding or legal recognition for future preservation (ibid). Currently, the NZHPT has identified around 6000 historic places in New Zealand, although it is argued that many of these are under neglect from development pressures, neglect or decay (NZHPT, 2005). Research conducted by The Ministry of Culture in 1997 into New Zealanders' views on the importance of culture found that New Zealanders highly value culture and cultural activities, including visiting museums and attending cultural festivals. A representative group of 937 randomly selected respondents found that the overwhelming majority (96%) of New Zealanders feel heritage buildings and places should be protected (Ministry of Culture and Heritage, 2004). Indeed, there is an argument that while one of The New Zealand Ministry of Tourism's target market; the interactive traveller; primarily visits New Zealand for its scenery and natural wonders, they also seem to have a demand to experience the history and culture of the nation (Ministry of Tourism, 2004).

21

However, there is an argument put forward by groups including Tourism New Zealand that New Zealanders experience a `cultural cringe' in relation to their attitude towards their own culture and heritage. This means that they often do not value their culture and heritage as being as interesting or significant as other nations' culture and history. As such, international visitors are perceived to be much more likely than domestic visitors to be interested in things such as New Zealand's art, exhibitions and heritage buildings (Tourism New Zealand, nd). Yet, if heritage buildings can be recognised as an important part of the tourism offering, it is argued that an increased appreciation of their value for tourism could result in an increase of those interested in preserving these sites (Hall & McArthur, 1998). Furthermore, with a greater appreciation of their heritage, New Zealand travellers could essentially become cultural ambassadors, spreading positive word of mouth to potential visitors to New Zealand (Tourism New Zealand, nd). Indeed, in relation to the heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay, one representative of The Art Deco Trust comments: "we use them (the buildings) as a tourism function to be able to raise money and raise awareness of what we've got and therefore the more people that know what we've got, the more people are going to realise it is valuable and the more they will get preserved" (Art Deco Trust Representative, pers comm, October, 2005). Indeed, a key issue for New Zealand is sustainable development. New Zealand's key strategic tourism document introduced in 2001: The New Zealand Tourism Strategy 2010 (NZTS) notes that "sustainable development is critical, as otherwise the benefits of tourism will be short lived" (Ministry of Tourism, 2004). There is thus a need to maximise the potential of those assets that can help New Zealand tourism's sustainable development. It is argued in the NZTS that seasonality is a key issue for tourism in New Zealand; that is, that demand peaks in the main tourist season; New Zealand's summer months of December through to March (Tourism Research Council New Zealand, 2006), with a significant reduction in demand in the low seasons. Thus, there is a strategic need to encourage the development of tourism assets that are attractive to international tourists year-round. Indeed, sustainable tourism development is a strategic approach mirrored in the heritage management literature (for example; Hall & McArthur, 1998; Howard & Pinder, 2003; Li, 2003; Brecken, 2005; du Cros, Bauer, Lo & Rui, 2005; Farrell &

22

Twining-Ward, 2005). Furthermore, there is a focus on targeting higher value tourists in an effort to `future proof' the New Zealand tourism experience; by targeting those that exhibit interest in culture and respect for the country's environment and values (Tourism New Zealand, nd). Indeed, with more than two million international visitors a year, which is forecast to grow significantly by an average of 4.7% per year, resulting in a total of 3.21 million international tourists forecast to visit New Zealand in 2011 (TRCNZ, 2006), there is a need to maximise the economic benefits of international tourism, while protecting the future of New Zealand's tourism. It has been argued that heritage buildings can assist with sustainable tourism development, and thus are important resources for New Zealand tourism. New Zealand poses a pertinent case study for the examination of the relationship between heritage buildings and international tourism for three main reasons. Firstly, there are a large number and variety of heritage buildings present in the country, even though these buildings may not be regarded as historically old or hold the perceived significance in comparison to heritage buildings in other parts of the world, such as Europe, and may thus lack historical classification. Secondly, their importance for the future of tourism to the country remains undetermined. Thirdly, there is a lack of existing knowledge regarding the nature of experiences gained and values held by visitors in relation to these buildings. 3.3: The Case Study: Hawke's Bay, New Zealand. Due to the large numbers of heritage buildings present in New Zealand, there was a need to reduce the scope of this thesis research, by examining heritage within a regional perspective. The region of New Zealand chosen as a case study destination for study was Hawke's Bay. This section will justify the appropriateness of the region for a case study in exploring the influence of heritage buildings in shaping the experiences gained by international tourists to the region, before describing the characteristics of Hawke's Bay, and of international tourism to the region.

23

3.3.1: Justification of Hawke's Bay as a Case Study. Hawke's Bay was selected as the case study for this research for five main reasons. Firstly, Hawke's Bay has a high concentration of heritage buildings. According to The New Zealand Historic Places Trust, there are 311 historic places in Hawke's Bay (NZHPT, 2001). As such, a prominent heritage resource base which is of "national and international significance" (ibid) exists in the region. Secondly, Hawke's Bay is a key tourism region in New Zealand, and visiting heritage buildings is the most popular cultural tourism activity amongst international travellers in the region (Colmar Brunton Social Research Agency, 2003). Thirdly, as Hawke's Bay is a prominent tourism region with a high concentration of heritage assets, it was one of five regions in New Zealand to receive Government funding and support for cultural tourism product development in 2003. The objective behind this funding was to encourage the regions to develop a plan for enhancing local cultural tourism in the region (Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, 2003). Thus, it can be argued there is potential to enhance the relationship between heritage buildings and tourism in the region. Fourthly, the loss of historic places and buildings to developers is regarded as a current threat to the historic fabric of Hawke's Bay (McGregor, 2003). The preservation of historic heritage is thus also a priority for the region and therefore the relationship between heritage buildings and tourism becomes an issue of some importance as a vehicle for enhancing the preservation of historic heritage in the region. Fifthly, there has been a paucity of previous studies of heritage in Hawke's Bay, particularly from an experiential perspective. Thus, this research contributes to an important gap in knowledge. In terms of scholarly knowledge, it could be argued that due to the prominence of heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay, there is clearly a significant relationship between heritage buildings and tourism. However, the region is an appropriate case study because of the composite strategic issues of preservation, sustainable tourism development and growth as previously discussed. There is also a need to know not just the relationship between tourism and heritage buildings, but the aspects of experience that comprise that

24

relationship; that is what stories and experiences are gained and most appreciated by international visitors, so that growth in international tourism can be effected. 3.3.2 The Research Context: Hawke's Bay, New Zealand. According to The Ministry of Tourism (2004), geographically, Hawke's Bay consists of Central Hawke's Bay District, Hastings District, Napier City and Wairoa District (see figure 3.1). The population of Hawke's Bay taken from the 2001 census is 142,947 making it New Zealand's eighth largest populated region (Statistics New Zealand, 2005a). Hastings is the most populated area in Hawke's Bay accounting for 67,428 residents, while Napier recorded 53,658 residents. Culturally, Hawke's Bay has a larger proportion of residents who identify themselves as being Maori (22.4%) when compared to the New Zealand average of 14.7% for other regions. The proportion of both Asian people and Pacific Islanders is less than the national average (Statistics New Zealand, 2005a). Thus, it can be seen that Hawke's Bay is a predominantly urban populated region, with a slightly different cultural make up when compared to other New Zealand regions. In terms of the region's tourism profile, international visitors spent 849,500 nights in the Hawke's Bay Region in 2003, which is similar to Bay of Plenty (814,300), but significantly lower than the major tourism regions of Auckland (14.96 million) and Wellington (3.55 million) (Tourism Research Council New Zealand, 2004). While domestic tourism is still the dominant tourism component for the region, international tourism in the region is forecast to grow at a much quicker rate than domestic tourism. It is forecast that by 2011, total visits to the Hawke's Bay region will increase by 223,700 (10.0%) to 2.46 million. International overnight visits are predicted to increase 83,800 (35.8%) to 317,700, while domestic overnight visits are estimated to increase by 58,400 (6.6%) to 939,300. International day visits are forecast to increase by 20,900 (46.3%) to 66,000 and domestic day visits are set to increase by 60,600 (5.6%) to 1.13 million (Tourism Research Council New Zealand, 2004). The projected international growth rates are higher than many other New Zealand regions. For instance, in terms of projected

25

growth rates of international day visits by 2011, Hawke's Bay has a higher growth rate than a number of regions, including Bay of Plenty (38%), Manawatu (32.5%), Waikato (31.1%), and Taranaki (17%) (Tourism Research Council New Zealand, 2004). While Hawke's Bay's forecasted growth rate for international day visits in 2011 is significantly less than those of Auckland (51.1%) and Wellington (62.5%) (ibid), these regions are major entry points to New Zealand, and thus can be expected to be the largest areas for tourist growth. However, in terms of secondary regional tourism destinations, Hawke's Bay is prominent, and expecting projected rapid international growth. Figure 3.1: Hawke's Bay Region, New Zealand (Total population 142,937: Statistics New Zealand, 2005b)

Hawke's Bay Region

Source: Tourism Research Council New Zealand, 2005. 3.4: Characteristics of International Tourists to Hawke's Bay. In terms of the main characteristics of international tourists to Hawke's Bay, approximately 53% of international visitors to Hawke's Bay are male, while 47% are female. These tourists are more likely to be aged between 20-35 or 55 and over. Indeed, 36% of international tourists to the region are aged between 20-35 (Tourism Research

26

Council, 2004). Thus, there is a need to acknowledge that when sampling, a representative sample is likely to include a higher proportion of young people than other New Zealand regions. Furthermore, as with other New Zealand regions, the peak season is Hawke's Bay's summer between December and March; thus, seasonality is an issue. As discussed earlier, a focus on heritage provides an opportunity to overcome seasonality issues, as it is argued that those tourists particularly interested in heritage and culture are more likely than other tourists to travel to New Zealand at different times of the year (Ministry of Tourism, 2004). Currently, summer results in a large swell of tourists to the region, with February generally being the busiest month. Visitors during the summer are most likely to be travelling for either a holiday or to visit friends or relatives (Tourism Research Council New Zealand, 2004), and as such, may have more time to experience tourism attractions. Most international tourists to Hawke's Bay travel to the region by either a rented or private vehicle (62%), while others choose to travel to the region by coach (9%) or by domestic airlines (8%) (Tourism Research Council New Zealand, 2004). Furthermore, it has been observed that international tourists often are thrifty on accommodation in the region, in order to spend more money on other activities in the region (Art Deco Trust, 2002a). As such, there is likely to be a high number of backpackers and other budget accommodation travellers in any representative sample. In terms of tourism products in the region, Hawke's Bay has a range of unique resources and activities that are popular amongst international travellers, such as taking a wine tour, taking in the view at Te Mata Peak in Havelock North, going to Cape Kidnapper's gannet colony, and visiting heritage buildings. Due to their popularity, it is likely that for many international tourists, these activities form a prominent part of their narratives of the region. However, as previously discussed, in terms of the region's heritage buildings, there is a lack of research exploring the relationship between the buildings and international tourists' experiences.

27

3.5: Background to Hawke's Bay's Heritage Buildings. As mentioned above, Hawke's Bay was selected as an appropriate case study for this thesis because of its prominence of heritage buildings and its prominent tourism standing. As such, some discussion of the heritage buildings that exist in Hawke's Bay as a resource for tourism is warranted to provide context to this thesis research. In 1931, Napier was hit by a devastating earthquake measuring 7.6 on The Richter Scale (Art Deco Trust, 2005). This resulted in the loss of nearly 260 lives. The vast majority of the buildings in the town centres of Napier and Hastings were destroyed either by earthquakes, aftershocks, or the subsequent fires caused by these (Borden, 2004). To rebuild their cities, architects and planners opted mainly to build Art Deco and Spanish Mission Buildings. Art Deco became the prominent form of building in the region, not only because it was at the height of popularity in 1931, but also because these buildings were fashionable, safe, cheap, and could be a source of pride for the community (Art Deco Trust, 2005). The Spanish Mission style came from California, U.S.A., where Spanish missionaries created an indigenous adobe version of their native Spanish architecture. Examples of the Art Deco and Spanish Mission style buildings found in Hawke's Bay are shown in Figures 3.2 and 3.3.

28

Figure 3.2: An Example of Art Deco Architecture: The Daily Telegraph Building, Napier.

(Sourced from www.artdeconapier.com).

29

Figure 3.3: An Example of Spanish Mission Architecture: Westerman's Building, Hastings.

(Sourced from www.artdeconapier.com). The Art Deco designs, in particular, became a symbol of pride to the local community in Napier, and were said to "express all the vigour and optimism of the roaring twenties, and the idealism and escapism of the grim thirties" (Art Deco Trust, 2005). However, preservation work on these buildings did not start until around the late 1960s when people began to rediscover the style and take it seriously (Art Deco Trust, 2005). Indeed, many countries throughout the world were too late to realise the potential of Art Deco buildings as heritage icons, and as a consequence, lost the majority of these buildings. 30

For example, England once had a number of impressive Art Deco buildings. However, after World War 2, there was a tendency to wish to neglect all that had led up to the war in favour of items symbolising a brave new world (Pearce, 2003). As such, a number of England's heritage buildings were lost. Hawke's Bay is unique in that it has managed to preserve a high number of its heritage buildings. It can be argued that a number of the region's buildings became heritage buildings through the importance placed on their link to both Hawke's Bay's and New Zealand's history, and their social importance to Hawke's Bay residents (NZHPT, 2005). Rather than having one or two stand out buildings, it is the sheer volume and close proximity of the heritage buildings in the region that is the great draw-card to tourists (Grant, 1996), (see Figure 3.4: heritage buildings shown in red). Figure 3.4: Napier's Art Deco Historic Precinct.

(Sourced from www.hawkesbay.co.nz). In addition to Art Deco and Spanish Mission buildings, Hawke's Bay has sixteen heritage trails, which give tourists the chance to experience many other types of heritage buildings. For instance, Hawke's Bay has a rich pastoral history, and a number of pioneering farm buildings can be found on the heritage trails. European and pre-European 31

buildings can also be found, while some towns feature historic country hotels and buildings from early fishing, tobacco and wool industries. There are also Victorian buildings in the Hawke's Bay region (Art Deco Trust, 2002b). Consequently, Hawke's Bay has a high concentration as well as variety of heritage buildings. Furthermore, throughout the year, a wide range of events and activities are offered around the heritage building theme. For instance, The Art Deco Festival is a five-day series of events held every year in February, and is modelled after an Art Deco festival in Miami Beach (Art Deco Trust, 2002b). Activities offered during this festival include a vintage car parade around the city, a jazz concert at Napier's Soundshell and the showing of a series of 1930's films in heritage buildings around Napier. The Art Deco Weekend is an important event for raising the profile of heritage in the area, and bringing money to the local economy. Indeed, an economic impact study conducted in 2002 showed that for that year, The Art Deco Weekend was worth $4.16 million to the local economy (Art Deco Trust, 2005). More frequently throughout the year, tourists visiting Hawke's Bay can experience activities such as a guided tour around Art Deco and Spanish Mission buildings, and a self-driven tour around Hawke's Bay heritage. The most popular paid activity is the Art Deco guided tour, which broke records in 2002, when 429 people were taken on guided tours in a single day. Indeed, in 2005, 17,320 people were taken on guided tours; a figure that is expected to grow significantly (Art Deco Trust, 2005). At other times, tourists can experience various other heritage themed activities such as "Art Deco dinners" or 1930's themed church services. A number of activities, such as themed church services can be experienced at no cost, resulting in high attendances. These events are organised by a wide range of groups including The Art Deco Trust, and Napier and Hastings' City Councils. They seek to achieve a number of objectives, including proving that "heritage is fun," and to generate publicity about heritage in Hawke's Bay, which will lead to general awareness year-round of the region's heritage (Art Deco Trust, 2005). There was a need to be aware that these events could affect this research, as the profile of international tourists attending these events was likely to be different than international

32

tourists travelling to the region at other times. Chapter Four will discuss how this issue was addressed, and will justify the methodology used in this thesis. 3.6: Chapter Conclusion. This chapter has determined that preserving and subsequently developing the use of heritage buildings for tourism is important for New Zealand tourism's future. Indeed, increasing the use of heritage buildings for tourism can assist with yield, sustainability and seasonality issues, as has been discussed in this chapter, and as such are important strategically to tourism in New Zealand. Hawke's Bay is a region in New Zealand with a particularly high concentration of heritage buildings. There is also a strong interest amongst many international tourists in the heritage buildings of the region, and historicalbased product development is also a priority for the region. As such, Hawke's Bay was seen as an appropriate case study region for this research, and it can be argued that, due to the importance of the region's heritage buildings for tourism, there is a significant need to better understand the influence of the region's heritage buildings in shaping international tourists' experiences of Hawke's Bay. As discussed in the research aims in 1.2, this thesis seeks to achieve this.

33

Chapter Four: Methods. In order to meet the aims of this thesis; that is, to explore the influence of heritage buildings in shaping international tourists' experiences of Hawke's Bay; to gain insight into the specific attributes of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings that influenced the experiences of international tourists visiting the region; and to examine the relative importance of heritage buildings for international tourism to Hawke's Bay as perceived by international tourists visiting the region, a mixed-methodology approach consisting of qualitative and quantitative tools was employed. This chapter will explain and justify the specific components of the mixed-methodology approach selected, in terms of their appropriateness to meeting the research aims. 4.1: Overview of Approach Taken. The thesis adopted a number of methodological tools associated with the interpretive and intuitive paradigms. A mixed-methodology approach including semi-structured interviews, a questionnaire containing contingent valuation based questions, and the use of photograph-supported interviews was designed to delve into respondents' experiences of a particular case study region of New Zealand: Hawke's Bay. The following subsections will justify and explain in detail the use of a case study approach, the adoption of interpretative and intuitive paradigms, and the components of the mixedmethod approach. 4.2: Rationale for a Case Study Approach. As discussed in the previous chapter, this research uses a case study of one region of New Zealand: Hawke's Bay. A case study is "a strategy for doing research which involves an empirical investigation of a particular contemporary phenomenon within its real life context using multiple sources of evidence" (Robson, 2002, p.5). It is an appropriate methodological approach, as it allows for research to be based in a practical real-life situation (ibid). Thus, it allows for real-word influences, such as the complexities of

34

consumer behaviour to be captured in research results. Furthermore, it can be argued that to some extent, experiences are setting dependent (McIntosh, 1997). A number of previous studies of tourists' experiences at heritage attractions have used a case study approach (for example, Beeho & Prentice, 1997; Howard & Pinder, 2003; Bharath, Joisam, Mattson & Sullivan, 2004; Majumdar, 2004; McIntosh & Siggs, 2005). These studies were able to present in-depth results and discussions that were pertinent to realworld scenarios. For instance, Balcar & Pearce (1996) found that visitors to heritage attractions in the West Coast of New Zealand were predominantly general interest visitors, and thus were largely seeking generalist recreational experiences. As previously discussed, it is argued that visitors often gain different experiences from different heritage attractions. As such, it was felt that because of the importance and prevalence of heritage buildings to Hawke's Bay, a case study approach was pertinent, in order to determine the specific experiences that international tourists gained from Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings. It is pertinent to note that this research is not a comparative case study between different areas or of different heritage attractions in Hawke's Bay. A comparative case study can be defined as "a social scientific analyses involving more than one social system or in the same social system at more than one point in time" (Pearce, 1993, p.21). However, it is acknowledged that comparisons between towns with more heritage buildings than another is useful, and will be noted if apparent and relevant in the discussion of findings. For instance, within Hawke's Bay, Napier is more renowned for its heritage buildings than Hastings. It was felt that a comparison between Napier and Hastings would be difficult to achieve, as tourists sampled may not have had sufficient knowledge or experience of both areas to accurately compare the experiences gained in differing parts of Hawke's Bay. Furthermore, the overall aim of this research was to gain a deeper understanding of the influence of heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay in shaping the nature of experiences gained by visiting Hawke's Bay, and thus, a comparative case study was not a specific research aim.

35

4.3: Rationale for an Inductive Approach. The case study research applied tools from interpretative and intuitive paradigms, particularly through the use of semi-structured interviews and photograph-supported interviews. However, historically, it is argued that much tourism research has generally been centred on positivist paradigms (Jennings, 2001). The positivist tradition is centred around a view that `what can be upheld as reliable knowledge of any field of phenomena is that which can be experienced using the senses' (Harre, 1981; Carr & Kemmis, 1986; Ayikoru, 2005). Thus, positivism is affected by an ontological belief that `there exists a reality out there, driven by immutable natural laws and that the role of science is to discover the `true' nature of how it truly works' (Guba, 1990). However, only recently have researchers begun to question `why' tourism phenomena are occurring and, as such, more qualitative based methodology approaches are being adopted; as it is argued that qualitative methods generally are more effective at being able to deeply pry into "the deeper meanings people attribute to tourism and tourism experiences, events and phenomena" (Jennings, 2001, p.55). It has been argued that intuitive approaches have been important in opening up a new way of thinking with regards to the measure of tourists' experiences (ibid; McIntosh, 1998, Ayikoru, 2005), and this research wished to further explore this emerging way of thinking. Furthermore, an intuitive approach is recommended to ensure that social and personal connections are not assumed, but instead are shaped by respondents in their own words, and information collected from respondents is of significant depth (Beeho & Prentice, 1997; Prentice et al, 1998). An intuitive approach was important in the context of the research aims, as it was deemed that results would be of most value if respondents themselves shaped them. In order to achieve the research aims, and apply an intuitive approach, a mixed-method approach was applied. 4.4: Rationale for a Mixed-Method Approach. During research design, an inductive approach to data collection was deemed essential to allow the research aims to be met, as it allows for deeper analysis of tourists' experiences

36

(McIntosh, 1998; Jennings, 2001; Ayikoru, 2005). A mixed-method approach consisting of a structured questionnaire, semi-structured interviews and photograph-supported interviews was utilized to facilitate inductive analysis. Denzin (1978) is an advocate of mixing methods and describes the core benefits of this approach. It is argued that researchers opt to use a combination of methods "because no single method ever adequately solves the problem of rival causal factors.... because each method reveals different aspects of empirical reality, multiple methods of observations must be employed" (Denzin, 1978, p.28). However, methods should not be mixed for the sake of it; any combination of methods should be combined with purpose and thought with the end goal of achieving a more in-depth set of results. Fielding and Fielding (1986) note that combining methodologies does not necessarily result in increased validity of results. The combination of thoughtful methods through a mixed approach "allows researchers to be more confident about their results" (Opperman, 2000, p.142). As a wholly qualitative approach is still treated with scepticism by some researchers (Walle, 1997; Goodson & Phillimore, 2004), this research included a quantitative approach (the questionnaire) to provide statistical support for the findings of the semi-structured and photographsupported interviews. In the context of industry relevance, most tourism research to date has provided statistical support to results (Jennings, 2001), and thus it was felt statistical information was of strategic importance and could potentially be used to influence policy and development. Conversely, it was felt a wholly quantitative methodology was not appropriate for this study, as it has been argued in previous studies that a purely quantitative methodology "rarely captures the subtleties of the tourism experience" (McIntosh, 1998, p.121; Opperman, 2000; Jennings, 2001). Specifically, through quantitative analysis, "the subtleties of the nature of tourism as a subjective and personal experience of place and events are lost" (p.123), as in-depth experiences cannot be explored. Furthermore, one of the major drawbacks in using solely rigorous quantitative methods is that the narrow guidelines imposed on researchers often causes them to refrain from using their own intuition and insight (Walle, 1997). Uriely (2005) adds that tourists' experiences have been put into restrictive categories in previous studies, and there is a move to becoming

37

more open and less restrictive in the study of tourists' experiences. It was felt this research required flexibility and creativity, through the use of techniques such as the laddering technique previously used in marketing, and openness in dialogue so that key dimensions of experience could be explored without predetermination, and the research aims would be met. As such, a mixed-method approach was adopted. The mixing of methods is not new within tourism research. A number of emerging qualitative techniques have now been recognised and incorporated in tourism, along with a trend to establish a mixed methodology of qualitative and quantitative methods (Goodson & Phillimore, 2004). However, it should be acknowledged that there are differing views held with regards to mixed methods. Jennings (2001) notes that the extreme arguments range from support to non-support for the mixing of methods. Supporters argue that mixing methods enables the `deficiencies' of both qualitative and quantitative methodologies to be minimised while critics argue that mixing methods will result in a merge of differing paradigms and ontological views and these will prove contradictory with each other (Jennings, 2001). As previously discussed, with respect to this study it was felt that quantitative methods were deficient in the sense that they would not allow for the subtleties and subjectivities of tourists' experiences to be realised, while qualitative methods are still seen by some as being "methodologically vulnerable" (Walle, 1997, p.526). Within the published literature, examples of research examining tourists' experiences of heritage environments employing mixed-methods have been abundant since the mid 1990's. For instance, Prentice et al (1998) assessed tourists' experiences at a mining heritage attraction at the Rhondda Valley, Wales. Their research was similar to this current research as it involved preliminary semi-structured interviews with tourists which helped to shape the content of structured questions contained in a questionnaire. Essentially, the experiential research conducted by Prentice et al (1998) "was shaped by interpretive science" (p.2). Similarly, Otto and Ritchie (1996) created a set of scales, developed through preliminary in-depth interviews, to test service experience. The authors concluded that "the best measurement of service experiences employ both

38

quantitative and qualitative components" (p.168), as a mixed-method approach yields richer data. Other studies that have combined approaches in this way include McIntosh & Prentice (1999), Kim & Agrusa (2005) and Pritchard & Havitz (2005). As such, it can be argued that the use of mixed-methods following interpretive principles is highly appropriate for the study of tourists' experiences, especially when managerial actions are required. In this thesis, a three-stage approach to data collection was thus followed, incorporating semi-structured interviews, a questionnaire, and photograph-supported interviews. 4.5: Semi-Structured Interviews. The first mode of data collection carried out in the case study region was that of semistructured interviews. These are interviews where a set of questions are established in advance, but interviewers are free to modify the question order, or leave out questions which seem inappropriate with a particular interviewee, or include additional questions (Robson, 2002). A semi-structured interviewing style is recommended when attempting to explore subjective elements such as tourists' experiences, as "the flexibility granted to tourism researchers through semi-structured interviews can be regarded as an asset because it gives the chance to react to individual circumstances and, as such, extremely rich information can be collected" (Kumar, 1996, p. 109). The purpose of these interviews was to explore the nature of experiences gained by international tourists from Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings, and to collect information that would assist with questionnaire construction. As such, it was felt that an unstructured interview style would not allow for key themes to be developed, as the content of the interviews would not be focused enough. Similarly, due to the largely unknown knowledge of the nature of experiences gained by international tourists through heritage buildings, it was felt that the adoption of a fully structured interview would not allow for enough flexibility in terms of exploring, through probes, themes presented by respondents. As such it was perceived that potentially pertinent experiential themes would be missed. Thus, the semi-structured interview design of Prentice et al (1998), McIntosh & Prentice (1999), Schanzel & McIntosh (2000) and others was followed.

39

The semi-structured interviews were conducted in February and March of 2005 in Napier and Hastings District, and generally lasted for 15-20 minutes (see 4.9.1 for details of the sample). They allowed for a rich source of information and a number of key themes to be collected, which were later included in the questionnaire for further analysis. All interviews were conducted by the researcher, in order for consistency of style and further exploration of themes. Furthermore, interviews were conducted on different days of the week and at different times of the day, to reduce bias. Interviews were held at quiet places around Napier and Hastings District, including various indoor and outdoor locations along Marine Parade in Napier, places of accommodation, Hastings Information Centre and Te Mata Peak. It was felt that these locations would allow for a wide range of different respondents to be sampled, and provide a suitable place of comfort for respondents. The questions used in the semi-structured interviews were designed to be open-ended, and for a number of themes to emerge (see Appendix A for a copy of the semi-structured interview schedule). It was also important that the questions were generalist, allowed for themes to emerge from respondents themselves, and would not be biased by the interviewer. Thus, generalist questions including, for example, "Can you please explain to me the nature of the experience you had while visiting those historic places?" were included in the interview schedule. Questions such as this allowed for a number of themes to emerge from the data collected, which were later analysed using content analysis and formed opinion measures to be tested in the subsequent questionnaire. Furthermore, in response to the aim "to gain insight into the specific attributes of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings that influenced the experiences of international tourists visiting the region", questions including "What interests you about historic places?" and "What to you are the most important attributes of historic places in terms of creating a successful tourism experience?" allowed for respondents to discuss the influence of a number of attributes of the region's historic places on their experience. The term `historic places' was used in general open-ended questions to explore the perceived and reported role of heritage buildings within that.

40

4.6 The Questionnaire. Constructed using opinion measures gained by content analysis of the semi-structured interviews, the questionnaire sought to provide quantitative support to the themes developed through the semi-structured interviews (see Appendix B for a copy of the questionnaire). As discussed, a number of themes emerged from the analysis of the semistructured interviews, and these were then included as opinion statements in a structured questionnaire. For instance, the theme of nostalgia that emerged from semi-structured interviews was further explored in the questionnaire when respondents were asked their level of agreement to the statement, "The heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay allowed me to reflect on a time when the world wasn't so complicated". The opinion statements were tested using five-point Likert scales, ranging from 1 (strongly agree, or very interested) to 5 (strongly disagree, or very disinterested). Five point Likert scales are advocated by Yoon, Gursoy & Chen, (2001) as generally easy to use by respondents, and tend to encourage less respondents to `select the middle option', which can be a problem with even-numbered likert scales (Fink, 1995). 354 questionnaires were distributed between July, 2005 and January, 2006, in order to sample main and shoulder seasons. The collection was continual, over different days of the week, and at different times of the day. The questionnaires could be collected at times when it was not possible for the researcher to be in the region because they were selfcompletion questionnaires, rather than interviewer-completed questionnaires, and international tourists could complete the questionnaire at either The Art Deco Shop, Napier and Hastings' information centres, or various places of accommodation. Selfcompleted questionnaires were deemed more appropriate for this research, not only because it helped minimise data collection time, but also when collecting personal information such as the nature of experiences, respondents sometimes record answers they feel are socially acceptable if they are face to face with an interviewer (Fink, 1995). Further advantages of this form of questionnaire include the fact that respondents can complete the questionnaire at their own pace and at a time that is convenient to them. However, the main potential disadvantage of this type of questionnaire is that the

41

respondent may not understand the language of every questionnaire item; consequently resulting in a partially completed questionnaire (Jennings, 2001). It was apparent from the wide range of nationalities that completed the questionnaires, that some of these respondents were likely to have difficulties with English. However, pre-testing was conducted with a range of tourists from different countries and of perceived different English skills. At the end of these pilot tested questionnaires, respondents were asked if they found any sections or questions difficult to understand. There was a consensus that the questionnaire was straightforward, and easy to interpret. As such, no nationalities were excluded from completing the questionnaire. A brief description of the Hawke's Bay region was inserted into the final questionnaire to ensure respondents were familiar with the region being investigated. With pilot testing, potential problems as discussed by Jennings (2001), such as the misinterpretation of questions and `guessing' of answers were minimised, and it became apparent that the questionnaire was understandable and straightforward to complete. As well as asking respondents' level of agreement on the nature of experiences gained in Hawke's Bay, it was also important that the questionnaire established some sort of economic value that international tourists placed on their experiences of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings, as this is important information when determining the importance of heritage buildings (Navrud & Ready, 2002). Furthermore, it would assist in answering the research aim "to examine the relative importance of heritage buildings for international tourism to Hawke's Bay, as perceived by international tourists to the region". As a representative of The New Zealand Historic Places Trust stated, while collecting information on the nature of experiences tourists receive through the existence of heritage buildings is important, a number of groups concerned with heritage issues are particularly interested in monetary figures (NZHPT representative, pers comm, August 18, 2005). As such, a quantitative method was required. "By far the most common method employed for valuing cultural heritage goods has been the contingent valuation and its variants" (Navrud & Ready, 2002, p.19). Contingent valuation was thus applied in the questionnaire as the most common method used in this regard.

42

Stated preference techniques, such as the contingent valuation method are appropriate for heritage research because a number of realistic compromise situations exist where stakeholders face a compromise between their own wealth and the quality of the cultural good that they derive value from (Navrud & Ready, 2002). The Contingent Valuation Method (CVM) determines preferences for public goods by looking at how much people would be willing to pay to essentially `purchase' the good (Salazar & Marquez, 2005). It has been widely used in heritage studies because it allows researchers to create an imaginary scenario directly related to the good in question (ibid). For instance, Dutta, Banerjee & Husain (2005) used contingent valuation to determine the existence of markets for heritage tourism to Prinsep Ghat, an attraction in Calcutta. Similarly, Salazar & Marquez (2005) used CVM to determine how much respondents would be willing to pay to restore an Old Arab Tower. They were able to determine that larger consumers of cultural heritage goods were willing to pay higher amounts to preserve the tower, compared with moderate and lower consumers of cultural heritage. Current examples of contingent valuation research conducted on heritage buildings have generally focused on a singular building (see for example, Navrud & Ready, 2002). However, it was deemed appropriate in this research to focus on the buildings as a collective, as it is the buildings as a collective that are the main attraction to tourists (Grant, 1996), and importantly, this thesis sought to examine general experiences of the region and how, then, heritage buildings fitted into that. Generally, and as was the case with this research, a form of tax or extra expenditure is used to determine consumer's willingness to pay, as voluntary techniques are subject to criticism (Berrens, Jenkins-Smith, Bohara & Silva, 2002), such as through encouraging free-riding behaviour and `warm-glow' responses. Specifically, a question was included in the questionnaire which asked respondents to imagine a scenario whereby they had booked to stay in accommodation in Hawke's Bay only to find out that the heritage buildings in the area were due to be modified before they began their visit. Respondents were then asked to state whether they would pay a random dollar amount on top of their accommodation costs to ensure the heritage buildings were preserved for their enjoyment. It was felt that because it was unknown as to how many questionnaires would be

43

completed, the questionnaire would focus on including relatively low random dollar amounts. As such, the dollar amounts $1-$15 were included at least ten times in the questionnaire. This ensured that, at lower monetary amounts, results could be relatively accurate. Due to time constraints, it was never intended that the results from the contingent valuation would cover a comprehensive range of dollar amounts. However, the results gained could provide insight into how much international tourists value the experiences they gained through the heritage buildings. This can then be balanced with analysis of the key experiential aspects engaged by tourists. 4.7: Photograph-Supported Interviews. At the same time as questionnaire distribution; that is between June and December, 2005; photograph-supported interviews were being conducted in order to address the research aims. As with the semi-structured interviews, and guided by the interpretive paradigm, the photograph-supported interviews generally lasted between 15-20 minutes. The use of photographic images to assist in revealing respondents' experiences is a relatively new research technique in tourism studies. "Often called the mirror with a memory, photography takes the researcher into the everyday world" (Denzin & Lincoln, 2003, p.50). Indeed, it was thought that the use of photographs was pertinent to this study as photographic images are central to the experiences of tourists, and it has been advocated that when tourists look at photographs, they are triggered into re-opening particular experiences (Garlick, 2002). Furthermore, it has been argued that the use of a photographic methodology when assessing experiences is preferable and certainly complimentary to a methodology solely based on experiential attribute assessments. Attribute assessment methodologies can determine what attributes are of importance to tourists' experiences, but the use of photographs allows researchers to assess the holistic nature of tourists' experiences (Groves & Timothy, 2001). The selection of photographs to assess tourists' experiences also allows for the personal nature of tourists' experiences to be revealed, as it can provide insight into the type of experiences that were most important to tourists and the narrative which tourists use to describe and define the nature of that which they have experienced (ibid). Indeed, as this research is a case study, the

44

argument that photographic techniques allow researchers to determine the impact of realworld influences was also pertinent. Furthermore, it was felt that the use of photographs would be a novelty for respondents, and thus, potentially increase the interest they had in the research through making it more engaging for them. With the clear potential of photographic methodologies, it has been argued that future researchers should look to experiment with visual methodological approaches in examining tourists' experiences (Garlick, 2002). Studies that have used photographs to examine tourists' experiences include Albers & James (1988), Mackay & Fesenmaier (1997), Markwell (1997), Fairweather & Swaffield (2001) and Fairweather & Swaffield (2002). The aim of the photograph-supported interviews was essentially to establish `the story of Hawke's Bay' from the narrative of international tourists. This would assist in determining the relative importance of heritage buildings for tourism among visitors to the region and the influence of heritage buildings in shaping international tourists' experiences of the region. As discussed in the literature review, collecting tourists' narratives is a very effective method of discovering the nature of experiences received by travellers, as tourists "generally have specific, well stylised forms of narrating their intense travel experiences" (Noy, 2004, p.79). The meaning of the journey begins to make sense as it is brought to consciousness through the study of narratives. As photographs are central to tourists' experiences (Fairweather & Swaffield, 2002), they are effective at eliciting tourists' narratives. Thus, the use of photographs to establish narratives fits well with an intuitive and interpretive paradigm in aiming to explore the experiences of tourists in as open-ended a manner as possible, and to record experiences in visitors' own words and using descriptions important to them. Forty-four images of attractions in Hawke's Bay were taken by the researcher and placed into a photo album that was then used to prompt open conversational-style interviews with respondents in the photograph-supported interviews (see Appendix C for a copy of these photographs). The photographs were chosen by the researcher to reflect a wide range of experiences that different market segments of tourists can gain while visiting Hawke's Bay. It was felt that forty-four photographs comprehensively covered a large

45

range of experiences available in Hawke's Bay, and would not be overly time consuming for respondents to view. Indeed, it has been advocated that when using photographsupported interviews, a `modest' number of photographs should be included in the sample (Fairweather & Swaffield, 2001). The number of photographs used was also similar to other experiential studies using photographs; for example, Faiweather & Swaffield (2001) and Fairweather & Swaffield (2002) used thirty photographs in their studies. Furthermore, it was felt the use of a compact photograph album would be easy to transport, and easy for respondents to look through. The photographs were taken on the researcher's personal camera, as photographs downloaded from a tourism web page may be overly biased, as essentially these are the images the region wants tourists to see, and are the focus of promotional imagery. Photographs used in this research included various photographs of different styles of heritage buildings, natural scenery, specific tourist attractions and other `everyday' features of the region such as main shopping areas. There are, however, a great deal of experiences available to international tourists in Hawke's Bay, and Denzin et al (2003) note that issues such as observer identity, the subject's point of view and what to photograph become problematic. In the chance that important photographs had been omitted, respondents were asked directly if they were to take photographs of their experiences in the region, what they would take them of. This aimed to minimise any bias the researcher may have had with regards to what they felt the main experiences of Hawke's Bay were. The view from most respondents was that the photographs well suited the experiences available in Hawke's Bay. A small number of respondents stated that their experiences gained at some attractions such as wineries and Cape Kidnapper's Gannet Colony were particularly prominent, and as such, they would take more photographs of these. However, it was felt that because these attractions were already represented in the photographs, adding new photographs would not enhance the strength of the research design. Photographs were purposefully `ordered,' so that photographs of heritage buildings were not all placed together, or at the front of the photograph album in order to eliminate any visual `bias' to heritage buildings. Ideally, in order to elicit the richest source of information pertinent to the research aims, it would have been preferable to give respondents a camera and ask them to take

46

photographs of whatever they wished, and then interview them at a later time. This would allow the results to be shaped even further from respondents themselves. While rich personal narratives would have been yielded, this approach would have been expensive, time consuming, and outside the limits of this thesis. Furthermore, the nature of the sample was that most respondents did not spend long in the region, and thus it would be difficult to recruit them for such a study. The forty-four photographs were presented as non-labelled photographs, as advocated in Fairweather & Swaffield's (2002) study of Rotorua's experiential elements. It was felt that by not labelling the photographs, respondents would be able to subjectively decide what the photographs meant to them, and thus would reduce potential bias caused through not allowing respondents to interpret the photographs themselves. In order to achieve consistent results, a number of set questions (see Appendix D) were designed and asked in every interview. However, it was important to keep the photograph-supported interviews conversational, as it allowed for flexibility with lines of questioning and the option to introduce new questions based on themes raised by the respondents, and to generally ensure free flow of discussion (Ryan, 2000). To further the depth of discussion, the photograph-supported interviews were combined with the principles of the laddering technique (Reynolds & Gutman, 1988). The laddering technique has been used in a number of previous studies that have sought to elicit the experiential dimensions of tourism (for example, Botterill & Crompton, 1996; McIntosh & Prentice, 1999; McIntosh & Siggs, 2005). The technique furthers the capture and recording of personal values as expressed by respondents in their own words, therefore facilitating inductive analysis and resulting in more reliable and valid research, as results are grounded in the realities tourists themselves describe (Prentice et al, 1998). Employing the laddering technique, follow up probing questions (laddering) are used to encourage respondents to think on a more emotional level and in terms of what they value by asking them `Why is that important to you?' It is argued that this allows for indepth experiences to be determined, and allows researchers to sense the layering of meanings associated with tourists' heritage experiences (Pearce, 1990). For instance, a

47

respondent mentioned that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings allowed them to remember their childhood with their father. The follow up question, "Why is that important to you?" allowed the researcher to determine that these were fond memories and gave pleasure to the respondent through reminiscing. Thus, through follow up questions, researchers can delve even deeper into the subjective nature of experiences tourists give in their own words (Botterill, 2001). The laddering technique is associated with Means-End Theory (Gutman, 1982). As such, the technique focuses on the linkages between product attributes (means), their consequences for consumers, and the personal values the consequences reinforce (ends) (Reynolds & Gutman, 1988). This helps to determine the subjective and personal consequences important to individuals. The principles of linking were used in this research as the laddering technique sought to determine the nature of experiences gained by international tourists through Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings, the attributes of the heritage buildings that shaped these experiences, and why these experiences gained were important for tourism to the region; in other words, a more holistic view of the experiences gained by international tourists. It is pertinent to note that this research uses only the principles of Means-End Theory through the use of laddering as discussed by McIntosh & Thyne (2005). Thus, traditional methods of analysing Means-End Theory information, such as through the Rokeach Value Survey (1968) and the value-andlifestyle tool (Mitchell, 1983), were not appropriate for this research. The photograph-supported interviews were conducted over a number of different days of the week and times of day. Interviews were conducted at the same locations as the semistructured interviews, including various locations along Marine Parade in Napier, Napier and Hastings' Information Centre, The Art Deco Shop, and Te Mata Peak. Section 4.9 details the characteristics of respondents sampled in these interviews. The use of photographs sought to act as a base for tourists to talk unprompted about the type of experiences Hawke's Bay provided them with. Prior to the use of photographs in these interviews, a brief introductory discussion with respondents was held and questions were asked including, "What have been your favourite experiences in Hawke's Bay so far?"

48

and "how long have you been in Hawke's Bay?" The purpose of this discussion was to `ease' respondents into the discussion and to establish rapport with respondents. A relaxed environment where good rapport is established between researchers and respondents is important. It is argued that in-depth subjective accounts of personal experiences could be facilitated only if the respondents felt at ease with the researcher and the style of the questioning (Miller & Glassner, 2004). It was felt good rapport was achieved in most instances, through warm introductions and `ice-breaker' questions used during the interviews, as many respondents liked to share jokes or continue discussions after the interview was completed. Following the introductory questions, respondents were asked to choose any number of photos that they felt most represented their experiences of Hawke's Bay. It was determined that respondents would not be asked to select a pre-determined number of photographs, as it was felt that for some respondents, only one or two photographs may have represented their experiences of the region, while other respondents may have wished to choose, for example, nine or ten photographs. While this is different from the technique used in Fairweather and Swaffield's (2002) study, where the purpose of asking respondents to choose a set numbers of photographs (six) was to allow for ranking to occur, this was not an aim of the current study, and thus asking respondents to select a set number of photographs was not appropriate. Rather, a holistic and meaningful response was sought. After respondents had selected their chosen photographs, they were asked to discuss why they had chosen these photographs and whether they had any stories or experiences they could share about their selected photos. If respondents did not explain their reasons for choosing every photograph, they were prompted as to their reasons for selection, in order to ensure important information was not overlooked. This was asked in an attempt to elicit narrative in relation to their experiences of the region. Respondents were asked why they had, or had not, included any heritage buildings in the selection of their photographs, and their reasons for this. This question acted as a lead-in to a more focused discussion on the influence of heritage buildings in shaping the experiences gained by international

49

tourists. In particular, the key questions asked concerning heritage buildings were, "What have these buildings added to your experience of the region?" and "have you got any stories/experiences you can share with me about the buildings in particular?" The questions were designed to facilitate open-ended discussion and allow for laddering, in order to achieve the research aims. The combination of semi-structured interviews, the questionnaire, and photograph-supported interviews sought to elicit significant and complementary findings from respondents, that when analysed together would allow the research aims to be met. 4.8 Sampling Methodology. The sampling methods selected for a research methodology are highly important, as they can affect the external validity, or generalisability of the results (Robson, 2002). With qualitative sampling in particular, it is vital to develop a sound sampling methodology, as there are many complexities involved in qualitative research design which if not addressed can cause confusion and misleading results (Marshall & Rossman, 1995). This section will justify the use of the sampling techniques for the semi-structured interviews, questionnaire and photograph-supported interviews. The sampling procedures as discussed in this section were the same for each of the semi-structured interviews, questionnaires, and photograph-supported interviews. As previously discussed, because the nature of experiences gained through Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings are likely to be different between international and domestic tourists, and due to the rapid forecasted growth of international tourism to Hawke's Bay, only international tourists were sampled. Due to the researcher being proficient solely in English, it is likely that non-English speaking tourists chose not to take part in the research. Thus, the sampling of non-English speaking international tourists presents an opportunity for future research. In terms of selecting respondents, this research utilised a form of convenience sampling due to the need to collect data within the restriction of the study period. This is "the

50

selection of participants for a study based on their proximity to the researcher and the ease with which the researcher can access the participants" (Jennings, 2001, p.139). While a convenience sampling method does not produce representative findings (Robson, 2002), it was felt that convenience sampling was the most appropriate sampling method to use in order to achieve an adequate sample size. Furthermore, convenience sampling has been used in a number of studies of tourists' experiences (for example, Turley, 2001; Lau & McKercher, 2004; Morgan, Moore & Mansell, 2005). In order to reduce bias from the use of a convenience sample, all data collection was collected at multiple locations in Napier, Hastings and Havelock North, as previously discussed. Predominantly `on the street' locations were selected for sampling, as a number of international tourists only stay a short time in Hawke's Bay (Statistics New Zealand, 2005). As such, it would have been difficult to talk to international tourists solely at their places of accommodation. If only places of accommodation had been sampled, international tourists who were only in the region for short periods, or staying with friends or family would not have been able to be included in the sample. It was felt that it was pertinent to gather information even from international tourists who had not spent much time in the region, as this would allow results to emerge as to whether respondents gained experiences through the region's heritage buildings, even without actively visiting them and to facilitate a holistic view of tourists' experiences. However, respondents needed to have some degree of experience in the region to be able to share their narratives, and as such, those that stated they had not participated in any activities in the region, were not involved in interviews. The chance of under or over representation of a certain group has been minimised due to the selection of a number of different locations throughout Hawke's Bay. Questionnaires and interviews were also administered on different days and times of the day to ensure as wide a range of people as possible could be included in the sample. In terms of sample size, 354 questionnaires, 50 semi-structured interviews, and 66 photograph-supported interviews were achieved. In order to achieve a 95% confidence level, 384 questionnaires were needed (Babbie, 1998). While the questionnaire sample

51

size fell slightly short of this, it still represents a healthy confidence level. Indeed, the questionnaire sample size was similar or greater than a number of other tourism studies using questionnaires (for example, Stern, Lassoie, Lee & Deshler (2003) used 214 questionnaires and Sanchez, Callarisa, Rodríguez & Molinner (2006) used 402 questionnaires). Similarly, it was felt that the sample size of 50 semi-structured interview respondents was sufficient for the development of key experiential themes to be developed. Indeed, this sample size is comparable with a number of other studies of experiences utilising interviews (for example, McIntosh & Prentice (1999) used 40 semi-structured interviews and McIntosh & Siggs (2005) used 42 semi-structured interviews). Furthermore, it was felt that rich information was uncovered, as the sample size was terminated at the point of redundancy; that is when it was felt no new information was forthcoming. Furthermore, the 66 photograph-supported interviews completed was a similar or the same sample size as a number of other studies of tourists' experiences using photographs (for example, Fairweather & Swaffield (2001) used 66 photograph-supported interviews & Fairweather & Swaffield (2002) also used 66 photograph-supported interviews). 4.9: Demographic Statistics of the Sample Population. This sub-section will discuss the most prominent demographic information of the semistructured interviews, photograph-supported interviews, and questionnaire to provide context to the sample population whose experiences are examined and discussed later in the thesis. A summary table of key statistics will be provided at the conclusion of each sample discussion. 4.9.1: Semi-Structured Interview Respondents. Figure 4.1 shows that of the 50 semi-structured interviews conducted, the largest group of respondents were from England, followed by other United Kingdom nations and Germany. A slightly higher proportion of males were sampled than females. In terms of

52

age, the most predominant age groups of respondents was those aged between 20-29 and 60-69 years, and the most common forms of accommodation used were motels and backpackers. As previously discussed, a large proportion of respondents had not spent a great deal of time in the region, with the majority of respondents staying three days or less in the region. Respondents were generally travelling in a group size of two, with their partner/spouse or friend. Table 4.1: Demographic Profile of Respondents to Semi-Structured Interviews.
Number and Percentage N % Gender Male Female Age 16-19 20-29 30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69 70+ Not given Nationality England United Kingdom Germany Australia Netherlands Canada Spain USA Not given Accommodation type Motel Backpackers Campervan Own home/friends home Home stay Motor lodge Campground Bed and Breakfast Not collected/Not staying 28 (56.0) 22 (44.0) 3 14 4 0 10 13 3 3 20 14 5 3 3 2 1 1 1 N 12 11 5 4 3 3 3 2 7 (6.0) (28.0) (8.0) (0.0) (20.0) (26.0) (6.0) Group size One Two Three Four Five Six Seven + Not given Number and Percentage N % 10 (20.0) 33 1 4 0 0 1 1 (66.0) (2.0) (8.0) (0.0) (0.0) (2.0) (2.0)

(40.0) (28.0) (10.0) (6.0) (6.0) (4.0) (2.0) (2.0) (2.0) % (24.0) (22.0) (10.0) (8.0) (6.0) (6.0) (6.0) (4.0) (14.0)

Time in region Less than one day 1-3 4-6 days 7-13 days 14-20 days 21-27 days 28 days + Not collected Travelling with Partner/Spouse Friends Alone Tour Group Not Collected Total Number = 50

7 20 3 0 0 1 8 11 N 27 12 9 1 1

(14.0) (40.0) (6.0) (0.0) (0.0) (2.0) (16.0) (22.0) % (54.0) (24.0) (18.0) (2.0) (2.0)

53

4.9.2: The Questionnaire Respondents. The sample that completed the questionnaire mirrored the sample that took part in the semi-structured interviews. Figure 4.2 shows that of the 354 questionnaires collected, the proportion of male and female respondents were roughly equal. The most predominant age ranges of respondents were between 25-29 (13%), 20-24 (11.3%), and 30-34 years (10.5%), which tends to support The Art Deco Trust's observation that a large number of international travellers to the region are young people (Art Deco Trust, 2002a). A large number of respondents were from England, other United Kingdom nations, Australia, and Germany. Respondents were most likely to be travelling through Hawke's Bay in a group size of two, generally with their partner or spouse. The most common place of accommodation for respondents was backpacker or youth hostel facilities, and as with many other studies of heritage attractions, it appears that a disproportionate number of respondents were well educated (for example, Hood 1983, Prince 1990, Yale 1991 and Prentice et al, 1993). Indeed, 118 (33.3%) of respondents held a tertiary degree, while 76 (21.5%) had partially completed a tertiary qualification.

54

Table 4.2: Demographic Profile of Respondents to Questionnaire.
Number and Percentage N % 158 (44.6) 173 (48.9) 23 (6.5) 21 40 46 37 21 29 19 29 32 28 16 8 7 1 19 (5.9) (11.3) (13.0) (10.5) (5.9) (8.2) (5.4) (8.2) (9.0) (7.9) (4.5) (2.3) (2.0) (0.3) (5.4) Number and Percentage N % 42 (11.9) 202 30 18 6 3 3 0 1 15 68 242 15 10 6 0 11 (57.1) (8.5) (5.1) (1.7) (0.8) (0.8) (0.0) (0.3) (4.2) (19.2) (68.4) (4.2) (2.8) (1.7) (0.0) (3.1)

Gender Male Female Not Given Age 16-19 20-24 25-29 30-34 35-39 40-44 45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74 75-79 80+ Not Given
Nationality (Top 10 Responses)

Group size One Two Three Four Five Six Seven Eight Nine Ten+ Time in region Less than one day 1-3 days 4-6 days 7-13 days 14-20 days 21-27 days 28 days +
Travelling With

Number and Percentage N %

Number and Percentage

United Kingdom England Germany Australia U.S.A. Netherlands Canada Switzerland Czech. Republic Belgium

76 52 43 41 31 13 12 9 5 5

(21.5) (14.7) (12.1) (11.6) (8.8) (3.7) (3.4) (2.5) (1.4) (1.4)

Alone Partner/Spouse Family With a friend(s) Organised group/tour Not Given

46 170 39 61 14 24

(12.9) (48.0) (11.0) (17.2) (4.0) (6.8)

Highest Educational Qualification Tertiary Qualification Partially Completed Tertiary Qualification Secondary or High School Other Secondary or High School Up to Three Years High School Trade Certificate Not Given Total Number = 354 118 (33.3) 76 (21.5) 42 24 22 17 (11.6) (6.8) (6.2) (4.8)

Accommodation Type Backpackers Hotel Motel Campervan/Camping Other With Friends and Family Not Given 84 69 58 52 (23.7) (19.5) (16.4) (14.7)

37 (10.5) 27 (7.6) 27 (7.6)

11 (3.1) 44 (12.4)

55

4.9.3: Photograph-Supported Interview Respondents. As with the semi-structured interviews, a larger proportion of males, compared to females were sampled (See figure 4.3). Furthermore, the largest proportion of respondents were aged between 21 and 30 years. In terms of the nationality of respondents in the photograph-supported interviews, respondents were most likely to come from England, Australia or the Netherlands. As with the semi-structured interviews and questionnaire, respondents were most likely to be travelling in a group size of two, with their partner/spouse or friend. The fact that most respondents again had been in the region three days or less, suggests that for many international tourists, Hawke's Bay is not a long-stay destination (Statistics New Zealand, 2005).

56

Table 4.3: Demographic Profile of Respondents to Photograph-Supported Interviews.
Gender Male Female Age 16-19 20-29 30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69 70+ Not given Nationality England Australia Netherlands Germany United Kingdom Canada Spain USA Chile Brazil France Travelling with Partner/Spouse Friends Alone Tour Group Not Collected Number and Group Size Percentage N % 38 (57.5) One 28 (42.5) Two Three Four 3 (4.5) Five 21 (31.9) Six 10 (15.2) Seven + 7 (10.7) Not Collected 9 (13.7) 6 (9.1) Time in Region 1 (1.5) Less than one day 9 (13.7) 1-3 4-6 days 7-13 days 18 (27.3) 14-20 days 18 (27.3) 21-27 days 9 (13.7) 28 days + 8 (12.1) Not collected 4 (6.1) 2 (3.0) Accommodation type 1 (1.5) Backpackers 1 (1.5) Cruise 1 (1.5) Campervan 1 (1.5) Hotel 1 (1.5) Own home/friends home Motel Bed and Breakfast 29 (44.0) Campground 20 (30.3) Host Family 13 (19.7) 2 (3.0) Total Number = 66 2 (3.0) Number and Percentage 15 33 0 8 9 0 0 1 17 32 5 4 2 1 3 2 21 12 10 9 7 3 2 1 1 (22.7) (50.0) (0.0) (12.1) (13.6) (0.0) (0.0) (1.5) (25.8) (48.5) (7.6) (6.1) (3.0) (1.5) (4.5) (3.0) (31.8) (18.2) (15.2) (13.6) (10.6) (4.5) (3.0) (1.5) (1.5)

The sample populations were similar for each of the three methods employed, as well as comparable to the profile of international tourists generally. For instance, in 2004, the largest proportion of international travellers visiting Hawke's Bay were from Australia (N= 74,500) and the United Kingdom/Nordic/Ireland (N= 71,000), and 36.0% of international tourists to Hawke's Bay in 2005 were aged between 20-35. Furthermore, a slightly higher proportion of international visitors in 2005 were male (53.0%), compared

57

to female (47.0%) (TRCNZ, 2004). This is of importance as it means the sample can be deemed largely representative. 4.10: Data Analysis. This sub-section will discuss the method of data analysis for the questionnaire, semistructured interviews and photograph-supported interviews. In particular, this section will justify the use of each method of data analysis, and describe the manner in which the data analysis processes occurred. 4.10.1: Analysis of the Questionnaire. A data sheet and data code was created on Microsoft Excel, in which the details of each of the 354 questionnaires were input manually. The data code developed for this research involved coding each of the possible responses as a number, which could then be input into Microsoft Excel. For instance, males where inputted as `1', while females were inputted as `2'. Ideally, there would be no missing data (Youngman, 1979). However, in the case of missed questions or sections, a `0' was input, which is the usual method to use for missing data (Robson, 2002). Once the data was input, it was `cleaned', through the use of the computer program Statistical Package for the Social Science's (SPSS) descriptive statistics, which allowed for any errors in data entry to be determined. SPSS was then used to analyse the data, as it is an effective software system for data management and analysis (Nicotera, 1995). A number of SPSS's tools, such as cross tabulation, chi square and Cramer's V analysis was believed to be pertinent in allowing the research aims to be met through data analysis, and as such, it was felt the use of SPSS to analyse the questionnaire data would provide strong statistical support to the findings of the semi-structured and photograph-supported interviews and provide the validation required from quantitative analysis. Indeed, chi-square analysis, through the support of cross-tabulations, is appropriate in the measurement of experiences, as it allows for statistically significant relationships to be found between variables (Malhorta, Hall, Shaw & Oppenheim, 2002). As such, the nature of experiences gained by certain market

58

segments can be determined. Furthermore, the use of the Cramer's V coefficient allows the strength of relationships to be determined. The closer the attribute is to 1.0, the stronger the association (ibid). As previously discussed, the theoretical support quantitative analysis can complement qualitative research with was an important reason for selecting a mixed-methodology approach. 4.10.2: Semi-Structured and Photograph-Supported Interviews. Thematic content analysis was carried out on both the semi-structured and photographsupported interviews, as it was perceived to be appropriate in terms of eliciting information pertinent to the research aims. Content analysis "involves determining the importance of certain features or characteristics in a text, and then carrying out a search for them in the text" (Hay, 2000, p.125). Importantly, because all interviews with respondents had been fully transcribed from the tape recordings for accuracy, content analysis allowed for results to be shaped from respondents themselves, which as previously discussed, was important for inductive analysis. Indeed, thematic content analysis is advocated when using photographic methodologies for experiential studies, as it can determine dominant themes that are meaningful to tourists (Groves & Timothy, 2001), and has been used in a number of studies using visual methodologies (for example, Wheelan & Abraham, 1993; Turley & Kelly, 1997; Groves & Timothy, 2001). Additionally, it is appropriate to analyse data collected through interviews using standard content analysis procedures, as this permits the development of themes through the use of appropriate coding (Kassarjian, 1977). Furthermore, Carney (1972) argues that content analysis `cries out' to be used when heavy study of a particular group is required. As the results of this research were to be `shaped' or defined by respondents themselves, it was felt that content analysis was thus appropriate. Content analysis requires examination of the data for recurrent instances of some kind, which are then grouped together by a manual coding system (Wilkinson, 2003). The coding system applied in this research involved key quotes pertinent to the research aims first being highlighted manually, and then, on a second review of the data, being grouped together into common themes, which

59

were developed from quotes provided from respondents. All quotes common to a theme were then further analysed, in order to develop the theme, and the components of it that were mentioned by respondents. It was felt that a manual method of content analysis was preferable compared to the use of a computer program, as it allowed for the researcher to immerse himself in the data, and develop an in-depth understanding of the themes emerging from the data. Ideally, more than one researcher would carry out content analysis, so that no themes are missed (Patton, 1980). However, data was analysed multiple times by the researcher, and it was felt that because the data had been collected and transcribed solely by the researcher, they were close to the data, and thus familiar with all themes. Indeed, Carney (1972) argues that the more familiar a researcher is with their data, the deeper they will be able to see the implications of their findings. From the content analysis, a number of themes pertinent to the various aims were uncovered. It was felt that results should emerge from the data respondents themselves provided, and thus a number of snippets from quotes pertinent to the results are entwined throughout the discussion of the themes 4.11: Ethical considerations. This research was reviewed and approved by The University of Waikato Ethics Committee prior to the start of research. Participation from respondents was voluntary and permission to include in the research sample was always asked for by each respondent before any data collection occurred. Participants were offered an information sheet prior to data collection explaining that all participation was voluntary, they could withdraw their comments from the research at any time, and request a modified copy of results when they were available (see Appendix E for a copy of the ethics and information sheet). The researcher's name, email and home postal address were provided to enable respondents the possibility to regain contact with the researcher should they so wish. Respondents were informed that the research was a Ministry of Tourism supported piece of research to complete the requirements of a Masters of Tourism and Hospitality Management Degree at The University of Waikato. To ensure the safety and comfort of respondents all data collection was conducted in public places. The approximate length of

60

time required by respondents and what their participation would involve was communicated to respondents before they began. Personal information from respondents, such as their name or address was not asked for, although questionnaire respondents could provide this information if they wished to enter the prize draw for a Hawke's Bay souvenir package valued at approximately $100. This prize was offered in an attempt to increase sample size through an increased interest amongst respondents. As participation was voluntary, it was important to respect respondents' confidentiality. All tapes used to record interviews were labelled anonymously with titles such as `Tape A' and during transcripts all respondents were given codes. Furthermore, in data analysis, all data was treated in aggregate form only. All information contained on computer was password protected and only accessible to the researcher. All written information was stored in a locked cupboard and at the end of the research all information was destroyed. 4.12 Presentation of Results. The results of the research undertaken in Hawke's Bay are divided into three chapters. Chapter Five determines the nature of tourists' experiences gained through Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings, through an analysis of respondents' narratives. Chapter Six determines the influence various attributes of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings had in shaping respondents' experiences. Chapter Seven provides an economic analysis of the relative importance of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings for tourism, through the discussion of results obtained from contingent valuation questions in the questionnaire and determines the relative importance of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings for tourism to the region. 4.13 Chapter Conclusion. This chapter has determined that the use of a mixed-methodology consisting of semistructured interviews, photograph-supported interviews, and a questionnaire is highly appropriate for the study of tourists' experiences. A mixed-methodology approach was

61

selected to negate the deficiencies of each method and to facilitate rich examination of tourists' experiences in Hawke's Bay. In particular, the questionnaire provides statistical validation of the interviews, while the semi-structured interviews and photographsupported interviews elicit the subjective nature of tourists' experiences, which cannot be achieved from a questionnaire alone.

62

Chapter Five: Exploring International Tourists Experiences and Narratives. 5.1: Introduction. It is important to determine the nature of experiences gained and valued by individuals, as an experiential perspective can yield "important information for product development and marketing, and provide a useful analytical perspective for service encounter management" (McIntosh & Siggs, 2005, p. 74). Indeed, it is argued that successful interpretation of the nature of experience is the key to ensuring the quality of the tourism experience (Hall & McArthur, 1997). This chapter presents the attributes of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings that were evident in international tourists' narratives. Although the aim of this chapter is to present findings of the semi-structured and photographsupported interviews, where appropriate, these findings will be supported by questionnaire analysis to provide generalisation. 5.2: International Tourists' Experiences of Hawke's Bay's Heritage Buildings. Findings of the in-depth interviews with international tourists revealed that the heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay enhanced the experiences of every respondent interviewed. This was evident in the unprompted narrative reported by respondents in the photographsupported interviews. Indeed, when asked to `please pick any photographs that you feel most represent your experiences of Hawke's Bay', a high proportion of respondents (N= 46; 70.8%) selected at least one photograph of a heritage building. Even respondents who expressed little or no overall interest in the heritage buildings explained that the buildings enhanced their experiences of the region in some way. For instance, comments from those who reported to have little or no interest in the heritage buildings included, "They're not my thing, but I still went to look at them because they're different" and, "I'm not particularly interested in them but they're nice to look at". It was not only the visual appeal of the buildings that appealed to those with little or no interest, as respondents explained that they also "enhance the atmosphere," and "make it an interesting place to explore". Thus, for these low-interest respondents, it appears that

63

Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings contribute to their experience through an enhancement of the visual environment, atmosphere and thus heighten the interest level of the region because of their unique nature. Indeed, previous research has argued that there is an inherent interest in any type of unique or rare object (Patterson & Bitgood, 1988). The finding that even casual viewers of the region's heritage buildings can gain experiences is important due to the fact that the biggest market segment of any heritage attraction is usually the general interest visitor (Balcar & Pearce, 1996). Indeed, the analysis of the semi-structured and photograph-supported interviews elicited three encompassing experiential themes that emerged from respondents' reported experiences of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings. They are; `visual appeal', `personal reflections' and `engaging experiences'. The following sections will define these themes, discuss the components of the heritage buildings that formed these themes, and demonstrate how the themes formed aspects of respondents' narratives of the region. 5.3 Theme One: Visual Appeal. Items that tourists' find visually appealing can also be known as the tourist gaze, which is defined by Urry (1990) as being items visitors to new destinations look upon with interest and curiosity. It has been argued that tourism experiences in general are of a fundamentally visual nature (Urry, 1990; Osborne, 2000). Indeed, as previously discussed in Chapter Two, heritage buildings can form a significant part of the tourist gaze, and cause visitors to mark places off from another (Urry, 1990). Furthermore, it is argued that pleasant visuals can be experienced through pleasant aesthetics, such as an object's colour and style, and this causes tourists to be more attentive and interested in the object viewed, and thus render them more open to gaining more mindful experiences (Patterson & Bitgood, 1988). Analysis of the interviews found that the theme of `visual appeal' can be subdivided into four themes. These are `colours', `cultures and styles,' `movie set appearance' and `concentration and scale'. This section will overview the manner in which Hawke's

64

Bay's heritage buildings influenced the visual appeal of respondents, before furthering the discussion through analysis of the four sub-themes. 5.3.1: Visual Appeal of Hawke's Bay's Heritage Buildings. A significant attribute of both Hawke's Bay in general and its heritage buildings that influenced respondents' narratives of the region was their visual appeal. Indeed, when asked "what have been your favourite experiences about Hawke's Bay as a region?" a large number of respondents stated it was the visual appeal of the region. Comments included "The scenery here is stunning" and "It is so nice to drive through the region and just look at the scenery". Respondents explained that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings complemented the natural scenery well, and thus added to the visual appeal. For instance, respondents' comments specific to the buildings included "The buildings look nice, they are clean and uniform" and, "They are visually attractive and the individuality of the style was neat". It is important for destinations to ensure that their architecture adds to the visual attraction of the region. Around the world, many cities are regarded as being visually dull because they offer nothing new for the eye to look at (Kierchoff, 1996), and as previously discussed, architecture is one way in which a region can differentiate itself. Furthermore, it is argued that the most mundane of activities, such as walking or eating, become more pleasurable against a pleasant visual backdrop (Urry, 1992). Indeed, some respondents commented on this. Comments illustrating how the visual appeal of the heritage buildings enhanced the atmosphere of these everyday activities included "It is so nice just to take your time and stroll around looking at the buildings"; "It's just nice to be able to sit here and have a coffee and look at things" and, "In other areas when you are walking down the streets you don't seem to take notice of the buildings, but here, it's nice to look up and see these things". As can be seen from Table 5.1, visually, most questionnaire respondents felt that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings were pleasant to look at, and created a unique townscape. Indeed, 94.0% of respondents felt that the heritage buildings were pleasant to look at, while 89.8% of respondents felt the heritage

65

buildings created a unique townscape. Indeed, no respondents disagreed or strongly disagreed with the statement that the heritage buildings were pleasant to look at, while only 0.7% of questionnaire respondents disagreed or strongly disagreed that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings created a unique townscape. Table 5.1: Questionnaire Respondents' Responses to the Statements: `The Heritage Buildings in Hawke's Bay are Pleasant to Look at' and `The Heritage Buildings in Hawke's Bay Create a Unique Townscape.
Strongly Agree The heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay are pleasant to look at The heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay create a unique townscape Agree Neither Agree or Disagree Disagree Strongly Disagree Not Given Total Number

N

%

N

%

N

%

N 1

%

N

% (0.0)

N 50 354

130 (42.8)

155 (51.0)

18 (5.9)

(0.3) 0

136 (44.9)

136 (44.9)

29 (9.6)

2

(0.7)

0

(0.0)

51

354

5.3.2: The Colours of the Buildings. When interviewees were prompted as to "what makes you feel the heritage buildings are visually appealing?" most respondents mentioned the colours of the buildings. The buildings' colours were perceived to be unique. For example, as one respondent commented, "In Scandinavia you do have the bright coloured buildings, but in a street they are generally only one colour, like blue or orange. Here you have some brightly coloured streets with different colours". The colours also contributed to the perception amongst respondents that Hawke's Bay was a unique townscape, as, "You see really drab colours on the buildings these days; these are something different". In particular, it was 66

the bright pastel nature and "cake-like" quality of the colours that respondents' reported to be visually appealing. Comments regarding this included, "They are very lollypoptype colours, I like them" and, "They are pastel colours ­ all girls love pastels!" As such, it can be argued that to respondents, the unusual nature of the colours of the heritage buildings enhanced the visual appeal of the townscape, as it provided a distinctive visual spectacle and allowed them to gaze upon the distinct (Urry, 1990). Specifically, through analysis of the photograph-supported interviews, it was clear that those buildings with an unusual colour scheme were more likely to form a place in respondents' memories, and thus their narrative of the region. Indeed, when looking at the photographs of heritage buildings presented to them, respondents were more likely to discuss photographs of heritage buildings that had unusual colours, rather than those that did not. For example, comments made by respondents included, "The brightly coloured ones make a good photo", and "I think the one's with colours that are particularly different to what we have at home are particularly interesting". Thus, when asked if there were any buildings that they felt stood out from others, most respondents mentioned the visual appeal of it; of which the buildings' colours were often an important component; for instance, "I liked the Kitson's building, it had bright colours". Experientially, it can also be argued that the colours of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings enhanced the atmosphere of the region, as they were regarded as "adding vibrancy to the region". Furthermore, the bright colours were said to add "a cheerfulness to the area, and make the area look clean". These comments potentially add further support to Urry's (1990) theory, that against a distinctive visual backdrop, ordinary activities are enhanced. However, a small minority of respondents (N=2; 1.7%) perceived the buildings' colours to be inauthentic to the time period, and as such, the colours of the buildings actually detracted from their visual experience; "I would just question whether the colours were authentic to the time; that is just something that concerns me a little". Thus, as Urry (1990) concludes, buildings are potentially gazed upon in different ways; as such, different visual attributes, such as their colours, can influence people in different ways. While a minority of respondents did question whether the colours were authentic to the

67

time period of the buildings, it appears that for most, the colours of the buildings enhanced the visual appeal, and thus their overall experience of Hawke's Bay. 5.3.3: The Blend of Cultures and Styles of the Buildings. Further attributes of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings that influenced the nature of the visual appeal of the region were the unique styles and cultural blends of the buildings. Comments regarding the styles of the buildings included "I love the repeating patterns", "The sharp edges and detail on the buildings are amazing" and "The uniformity of lines are splendid". Experientially, the varied details of the heritage buildings created interest, as, "The area was so explorable, it was neat just to walk around and look for the intricacies of the buildings". Indeed, it has been found that visitors sometimes suffer from object satiation and fatigue when consuming tourism products, and repetition of product content can cause disinterest (Patterson & Bitgood, 1988). As such, the perception that the region's heritage buildings combine to make Hawke's Bay "explorable" is significant. To date, most studies looking at the role of cultural styles of buildings have focused on singular heritage buildings (for instance, Beeho & Prentice, 1997; Salazar & Marquez, 2005). As such, the finding that heritage buildings as a collective can add to the perception that a city is worth exploring is undeveloped in the literature. The impression that there is "so much to see" in Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings reportedly caused respondents to stay longer, or want to stay longer in the area. For example, respondents mentioned "I probably wouldn't have stayed an extra day if it weren't for the buildings," and "There's so much to see here, you need four or five days really to take it all in". While the various styles of architecture enhanced the visual appeal of the buildings, what made these styles unique to respondents was the unique cultural blend of Maori, South American and European designs. While there are examples of Art Deco and Spanish Mission buildings around the world, respondents' perceived them as not having as much cultural depth as those in Hawke's Bay. Respondents felt that the cultural blends of the

68

buildings "gave the buildings a New Zealand feel" because "It is neat that Maori history and culture is mixed with the kind of modern European 1930's culture". Because of the cultural and historical attributes of the heritage buildings, respondents felt the heritage buildings formed a substantial part of their `story of New Zealand', as, "Hawke's Bay has the heritage cultural side of it. There's not anywhere else that has got so much of the architecture and the style"; " It's got more of a cultural feel here", and, "Hawke's Bay has that heritage and history side, more of a building history that New Zealand lacks". The designs present on certain buildings acted as a trigger for some respondents to desire to learn more about certain cultures; for instance, "We are really here to learn about Maori culture, and it was interesting to see some of the designs on the buildings"; "We were able to learn more about Maori culture through some of the design motifs", and "We are fascinated with Mayan culture, and we saw some designs that appear to be influenced by this, which was really surprising and interesting". Essentially "the amalgamation of cultures" allowed for a multi-cultural visual experience, which was still uniquely `kiwi'. Furthermore, it can be argued that this unique visual blend of cultures further allowed respondents to gaze upon the distinct (Urry, 1990). Significantly, in the heritage literature, while much has been written about the visual appeal of architecture, little appears to have been written about the ways in which the visual appearance of heritage can actually enhance cultural and heritage learning. Through inducing respondents to recall aspects of past travel to other destinations with which they could draw comparisons, and enhancing the desire for learning, the visual aspects of Hawke's Bay's heritage reportedly facilitated cultural learning. For example, one respondent commented "We're definitely learning, it's nice to have the buildings as a background to the earthquake and everything". 5.3.4: The Concentration and Scale of the Buildings. A further dimension of respondents' visual appeal was the concentration and scale of the region's heritage buildings. When interview respondents were asked "are there any buildings that you've seen that have stood out from others?", the overwhelming majority

69

of respondents said that, to them, it was the buildings as a collective that they enjoyed the most, and they could not pick any one that stood out. This is similar to Fisher's (2000) study of heritage in Levuka, Fiji, where it was found that it was the combination of buildings that was the attraction to tourists. It further adds weight to Grant's (1997) argument that in Hawke's Bay, it is the buildings as a whole that are the real attraction. Quotes illustrating respondents' views on the concentration of the buildings included, "The buildings can't be found anywhere else in the world. You might find buildings here and there, but never this concentrated"; "We have sporadic buildings here and there, but it is great here with the sheer numbers"; and, "If it had been one building on its own it would have been a little unusual, but the fact that all the buildings are similar, they all blend and work together". It is significant that a large number of respondents made comments regarding the concentration of the buildings, as essentially, the close proximity and large numbers of heritage buildings potentially acted to intensify the strength of `the gaze' of the buildings in respondents eyes, and thus heightened the nature of experiences gained. Consequently, to achieve the type of visual experiences gained through Hawke's Bay's collection of heritage buildings elsewhere would be difficult. For example, as one respondent stated "We don't have Art Deco cities like Napier; we have nothing on this scale. It would take a long time to see Art Deco available in England, because there's nothing centred like this". Thus, it can be argued that the large number of heritage buildings in a confined area is a further way in which the region's townscape is perceived to be distinctive. Indeed, when questionnaire respondents were asked to give their opinion to the statement "It would not matter if some of the heritage buildings in this region are lost", there was an overwhelming disagreement with the statement, with 26.6% of respondents strongly disagreeing, and 47.6% of respondents disagreeing with the statement; thus further suggesting that it was the buildings as a collective that added to their experience. Similarly to the concentration of the heritage buildings, it was found through analysis of interviews that some respondents considered the scale of the buildings to be of interest. All respondents that commented about the scale of the buildings appreciated that the

70

buildings were not high-rise, as according to them, "high-rise buildings diminish certain experiences". Comments given by interview respondents regarding this included "We have four story buildings with large roofs and they build them really close together, so you feel like rats in a cage. Here they tend to be single-story"; "In Chicago, you may have an Art Deco building and it's overwhelming. Here it is a real people scale and I think that's quite attractive to somebody walking around. It's very user friendly" and, "We're used to seeing quite large properties and we commented on the scale of the properties. It's a much more human scale". The scale of the buildings allowed respondents to gain the experience of space to move, which further enhanced respondent's narrative of the area. For example, respondents appreciated that Hawke's Bay was an "uncrowded" region. The scale of the heritage buildings enhanced the nature of the uncrowded experience, as, for example, when discussing the differences between another New Zealand region; Auckland, and Hawke's Bay, respondents stated "In Auckland, you feel a lack of air, but here the buildings are more separated, so you feel you have more space"; and "We didn't like Auckland, it was too crowded and we have places like that at home". Scale is thus an important experiential asset of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings, as many countries feature townscapes consisting of predominantly high-rise buildings, and thus people often sense being over-crowded. Indeed, of those interviewees who from the presented photographs selected one or two heritage buildings that they felt stood out from others, it was often not the largest buildings that respondents favoured the most. Comments made while viewing the presented photographs of heritage buildings included "There's buildings on a grand scale with huge pillars, and there's some of these little buildings, which are on a small scale, but they're still stylised Art Deco"; "You have a lot of grand old buildings but some of the smaller ones are gems too" and "We really like to see the smaller properties because they're on a different scale to back in Australia".

71

5.3.5: Hawke's Bay: The Appearance of a Movie Set. A further manner in which Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings contributed to the visual appeal of the region was the `feeling like they should belong in certain books, television programs or movies'. Indeed, in terms of visual appeal, it is argued that `movie-set' locations can become significant icons that remind people of movies, and become the focus of the tourist gaze. Furthermore, these icons are regarded as being extraordinary, and thus distinguish the location from others (Riley, Baker & Van Doren, 1998). Analysis of the interviews found that respondents who thought of Hawke's Bay as a `movie set' were of diverse ages and from no one particular country. For two respondents, Hawke's Bay was "very Agatha Christie" and "The only time we see anything like that (Art Deco buildings) on television is when you get repeats of Agatha Christie's Poirot". Other comments given by respondents relating to this theme included "It is sort of like the Miami Vice set"; "It looks like a 1950's set and being in America around the time of the mafia"; "It is locked in a period of history, it is almost a movie set" and, "It could almost be a movie set, it's not quite real". These comments were not pre-empted by the interviewer, and arose through the questions "How would you describe Hawke's Bay to your friends and family?" and "What in particular is it about the heritage buildings that interests you?" The central facilitator of these experiences was the appearance of the heritage buildings, as, for example, Miami Vice and Agatha Christie's Poirot were both filmed in distinctively Art Deco locations (Fiftiesweb, 2006; Anonymous, 2006). While there has been increasing interest within the published literature on how films shape destination images and resulting experiences, to date, there has been little analysis of the impact of historic films on heritage tourism (Frost, 2006). It has been found that, when tourists are motivated to travel to experience heritage they have seen in film or television, they wish to have a story-based experience, rather than a scenery-based experience. While film and television tourists may appreciate attractive scenery of a region, it is the authenticity of the presented heritage that is of central importance to their

72

experiences (Frost, 2006). As such, `movie-induced' tourists generally wish to have educational experiences which support the visual experiences of the `movie set'. This indeed is true of respondents that stated Hawke's Bay reminded them of a film or television set. For instance, a respondent that compared Hawke's Bay to an Agatha Christie series: Poirot, concluded by stating, "From what we've seen of New Zealand, there is no history of this era, this is a type of history that is more building related...I like that, it gives it a history that has probably been the one thing we've found missing in New Zealand". Other respondents commented, "The buildings fill a gap, the other New Zealand towns are very practical and sensible, but this has an age to it, a historical theme" and, "The buildings have definitely helped us to learn something, it makes things more interesting if you can learn things as you walk about". The discussion of Theme Two: Personal Reflections (see below), will further analyse the ways in which the `movie-set' appearance of Hawke's Bay allowed respondents to gain more than solely visual experiences. While none of the television programmes or films mentioned by respondents were filmed in Hawke's Bay, the fact that respondents attributed these forms of media to Hawke's Bay is of significance. Indeed, often it is not just the actual setting of film or television that benefits from the production, as films containing historic items have the potential to carry the appeal of heritage across wide markets (Frost, 2006). It appears therefore that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings have allowed the region to benefit from this fact, and because of the uniqueness of the heritage buildings as previously discussed, the presence of heritage buildings in media, such as those that can be found in Hawke's Bay, formed a particularly strong narrative in the minds of some respondents to the region which is important for building brand-identity. 5.4: Theme Two: Personal Reflections. Through analysis of interviews, it was found that four sub-themes constituted the theme `personal reflections'. This section argues that through their experiences of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings, a number of respondents were able to personally reflect upon

73

their lives through reminiscences evoked by their perceived `familiarity' with the region. Furthermore, the heritage buildings evoked some respondents to `yearn for the past'. As such, the personal reflections experienced from Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings are formed through a combination of `familiarity', nostalgia, and the evocation of personal memories. It is argued that the most valued and most memorable experiences are those that tourists can attribute personal meaning to (Timothy, 1997). As will be discussed below, the sub-themes arising from respondents' experiences of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings; they are: familiarity, nostalgia and personal memories, were important to respondents, and allowed them to gain meaningful and emotional experiences. Within the heritage tourism literature, those experiences that are highly personal in nature have received the least attention, and thus are least understood (Timothy, 1997). Indeed, it is of importance to establish the nature of personal experiences tourists gain from an attraction, as it is argued that tourists travel to experience heritage of a personal nature (ibid). It is argued that these types of personal and reflective experiences are highly sought after amongst tourists. Meethan (1996) purports that when people travel, there is an increasing move away from demand for mass-marketed tourism experiences, towards the desire for more personalised, individualised experiences. 5.4.1: Nostalgia. Whilst not a majority, a significant number of respondents' narratives of Hawke's Bay reported feelings of nostalgia; that is, a yearning for the past (Stern, 1992), or "a homesickness for a past era" (Prentice, et al, 1998, p.9). For instance, 9.2% and 24.5% of questionnaire respondents respectively, strongly agreed and agreed with the statement "the heritage buildings in Hawke's allowed me to reflect on a time when the world wasn't so complicated". It is argued that nostalgia is a valued personal experience because it allows people to create an idealised version of the past, to fill a gap in the present (Tannock, 1995). Indeed, many people feel modern life is deficient in certain areas and past times experienced through nostalgia spurs on values such as loyalty, honour, courage and romance (Hyounggan, 2005). Through analysis of the semi-

74

structured and photograph-supported interviews, it was the heritage buildings and activities associated with these that evoked nostalgic experiences. Comments from respondents illustrating this included "There's something about, you know, we're living in a bulls**t age now, and when you come back to all these simpler things, it's great having the quiet things and the simple pleasures, to be able to reflect"; "The old buildings provide people with the feelings of a simpler life, not bombarded with technology and the like", and, "During the Art Deco weekend, you see people simply sitting on the lawn eating asparagus sandwiches, and you might say what is the attraction in that? Well that is the attraction, doing nothing!" Experientially, feelings of nostalgia contributed to respondents' narratives of the region and it is thus significant to note that Hawke's Bay offers a heritage experience whereby visitors can evoke a nostalgic sense of time and place. Nostalgia is an emotion that people of all ages can experience, although the stimulus used to facilitate these feelings of nostalgia must have personal meaning (Goulding, 1999). During analysis of the photograph-supported interviews, it was found that generally those of an older age most commonly reported nostalgia from their experiences of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings. Perhaps not surprisingly, this reflects general findings of previous nostalgia studies that found that gender differences were not significant in experiencing nostalgia, but variations across ages were (ibid). It was found that the heritage buildings triggered personal meaning amongst the older respondents as it allowed many of them to reminisce on personal memories of their childhood; the most common way that people ascribe personal meaning to nostalgia (Goulding, 1999). Younger respondents also experienced nostalgia through feeling that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings reminded them of a peaceful, quiet city from the past. For example, a young respondent commented, "It is a really nice and quiet town here. In Holland, and other places, things have got so busy, and you have plain buildings where there is not much space between them. It is nice here". Indeed, the most popular photograph selected by respondents who reported feelings of nostalgia or recollection of personal memories was one of the Daily Telegraph building with a vintage car parked outside of it. As respondents stated, "The one with the building and the vintage car outside, it is perfect!"

75

and, "I love seeing these vintage cars, they remind me of the cars that were around when I was a lad". It can thus be argued that the nostalgic stimulus of the heritage buildings is indeed strong, but can be further heightened through the use of supporting stimuli, such as vintage cars of the period, and period clothing. Conceptually however, it must be acknowledged that Hawke's Bay is indeed a `living city' and not a museum. This affects the interpretation adopted and nature of the experiences that can be gained by visitors (Beeho & Prentice, 1997). Essentially, whilst respondents do gain experiences such as nostalgia in Hawke's Bay, they are gaining a 1930's based experienced within the context of a 21st century city. Thus, the experience can be deemed anachronistic; that is, not completely authentic. To present an experience that is as authentic as possible, Hawke's Bay must ensure that the appearance of `21st century necessities' do not overwhelm the 1930's image. For example, one respondent mentioned that, in England, heritage buildings had been "surrounded by golden arches everywhere". However, as will be discussed later, respondents did gain experiences of Hawke's Bay as a `contemporary living city'; but authentic aspects must remain. There is also a need to differentiate between nostalgia and personal memories. Nostalgia can be evoked by reminiscences, but generally concern a time and place that has been idealised and becomes an experiential place that is made `rosy' by the often untrue reflections of the participant (Stern, 1992; Goulding, 1999; Prentice et al, 1999). 5.4.2: Personal Memories. As with the nostalgic experiences reported above, the 1930's theme of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings made some respondents reflect on their past. Indeed, when questionnaire respondents were asked to indicate their opinion to the statement "The heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay allowed me to reflect on my past," 6.0% and 16.4% of respondents respectively strongly agreed and agreed with the statement. It is an important point that some respondents could gain this experience through Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings, as reminiscing is a pleasurable experience, generally driven by fond memories of one's youth (Tannock, 1993). As reported above, it was particularly older English

76

respondents that were likely to recount personal memories by viewing the heritage buildings. This appears to be because of the number of Art Deco style buildings, in particular, that were reportedly present in England during the youth of these respondents. As such, it could be argued that, essentially, while Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings tell the story of Hawke's Bay's and New Zealand's heritage, it also forms a part of the heritage of individual visitors; they imbue the experience with their own personal meaning and translate it to a heritage context they can personally remember. Due to the demolition of many of the Art Deco buildings in England, respondents reported that they could no longer experience their youth through the buildings in their home regions. Comments from English respondents reflecting on these personal memories included; "Coming from England, there's a lot of that stuff (heritage buildings) interwoven into our history"; "Yes we did have these types of buildings, but most of them are gone now..., so it was nice to reminisce and see them again"; "We are very much interested in the buildings in the area because that's our era shall I say!"; "I come from North England and I used to go on holidays when I was young and I remember the Art Deco back then, I wish I could have bought my Dad here, he would have loved it, it reminds me of where I grew up", and, "We see this as being reminiscent of the styles that were around when we were children and young people". Indeed, it was clear through the researcher's observations during interviewing that those respondents recounting stories of their youth were enjoying doing so, through laughter and smiling. While principally it was English respondents that experienced personal reminiscences, it was not exclusively respondents from England who gained this experience. Through the architectural style of the heritage buildings, respondents from countries including Wales, Ireland, Scotland, U.S.A. and Scandinavia each recounted personal memories. For instance, "Well it reminds me of places I've been to in Scandinavia. We were in Iceland earlier this year, they've got tin roofs, corrugated metal roofs but the old part of the town is brightly coloured, it reminds me of there" and, "It reminds me of old buildings that they used to have in Europe, but they've preserved them here. In the 70's and 80's they used to demolish these things, and then in the 90's they'd say we're losing our history. They did it a lot in Glasgow, a lot of the old art buildings were typified architecturally by

77

red sandstone on the housing. To come to a town and see buildings like that still standing, it is quite great". It can thus be argued that the region's heritage buildings can evoke personal memories of visiting other countries, and consequently, Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings are not solely of importance to New Zealand but to the wider travel experiences and townscapes visited by individual tourists. It is pertinent to note that while Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings may be different to those elsewhere, the tourist creates their own important story based on snippets of memory or comparison with certain aspects of the built townscape elsewhere. Thus, the tourist aids in creation of their own experience by making the environment and experience relevant to a context they are personally familiar with. These findings are similar to Fisher's (2002) study of Levuka, Fiji, which found that although the heritage buildings were Fijian, essentially they were being preserved for European tourists to reminisce about their past. From the photograph-supported interviews, it also emerged that, in particular, Reading's Cinema in Hastings and Napier's Cinema facilitated personal reminiscing. One respondent described how; "These are things that we remember from our own childhood, we had a lovely cinema. We went to the market town in the centre of England and that was a beautiful cinema but that got turned into a Bingo Hall and then it came a pigeon loft basically. Pigeons took over it and they've boarded it up and it got knocked down last year. It's a shame, it's so sad to see and that's the same all across the country. I think particularly from our age we all remember those cinemas from school when we were growing up which obviously were Art Deco and they were fond memories ­ and we all went up to them, and they're just not there anymore, they've been replaced by the multiplexes which are just soulless, characterless blocks of materials". Another respondent commented, "The theatre here is so grand, we remember going to the cinema as kids in England and they had those great pillars and the beautiful lights indoors, it was really beautiful, so it is neat to be able to see a cinema like this nowadays".

78

It is clear that reflecting upon favoured childhood memories is a pleasant experience. As such, it can be argued that particularly those buildings that allowed respondents to reminisce on favoured memories, such as going to the cinema, were likely amongst those seeking personal intimate experiences, to form a strong part of respondents' narratives of the region. 5.4.3: Familiarity. It was commonly reported amongst respondents that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings provided some, albeit a minority, of particularly English respondents, with the sense of `familiarity'. It is not surprising that generally English respondents felt `familiarity' with the region as familiarity is closely linked with personal memories; familiar settings often results in tourists' recollecting scenes of home that summon up fond memories (Stern, 1992). Familiarity is a preference for the tourist bubble; that is, experiences and situations that provide tourists with comfort and confidence (Cohen, 1972). Thus, as some respondents perceived Hawke's Bay to be similar to their home countries when they were young, in essence, they felt like they had experienced that type of environment before. However, the reported sense of `familiarity' was not solely linked to respondents' personal memories. The perception that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings belonged to a movie, book, or television program, as previously discussed, also influenced the sense of familiarity gained, as respondents felt like they had `seen' their environment previously. Indeed, it is argued that the nature of experiences gained through `the movie set' feel of Hawke's Bay are positive and often similar to the benefits of familiarity; Riley and Van Doren (1992) argue that "extended exposure to attractions through the medium of film allows potential tourists to gather information and vicarious knowledge, therefore lowering the anxiety levels caused by anticipated risk" (p.262). It is important that a region can provide familiar experiences, as Baloglu's (2001) study of tourists' experiences in Turkey confirmed that consumers who felt familiar with their surroundings had more pleasurable, arousing, relaxing and exciting experiences of the area. Similarly, Fisher (2000) argues that there are certain landscapes that make people

79

feel more at home. These landscapes are those that remind people of their past histories whether lived or constructed out of perception. Indeed, built structures, such as heritage buildings can become an integral part of favoured landscapes; that is, areas that people feel comfortable with and enjoy spending time in (Lavoie, 1998). Quotes that illustrate the familiarity reported from interview respondents, mainly from England included, "We do like to go to places that are more English, and prefer to be where things are like England, with speaking, driving, that sort of thing. Right now Napier reminds us of England quite a bit"; "Where I come from in the west of England, we have villages that all have the same sort of architecture and that adds a certain appeal to them", and "Napier in particular is reminiscent of seaside towns in the UK". While it must be acknowledged that there are segments of tourists that actively seek out unfamiliar environments (Lepp & Gibson, 2003), Sönmez and Graefe (1998) found that perceived unfamiliarity was a stronger predictor in avoiding travelling to a region, rather than planning to visit one. However, these authors also found that after a certain point, in terms of familiarity, the destination became less attractive. As such, a destination needs to maintain its own unique personality. For Hawke's Bay' this means promoting attractions that are perceived as being unique, such as heritage buildings and Cape Kidnappers' gannet colony and adding `the New Zealand touch' to the experiences that tourists can gain from the region. 5.5: Theme Three: Engaging Experiences. The third theme constitutes the attainment of `engaging experiences'. These experiences allowed respondents to gain mental stimulation through educational experiences, and to be rendered `mindful' during these experiences. Mindfulness is defined as being a "state of mind that results from drawing novel distinctions, examining information from new perspectives and being sensitive to context" (Langer, 1993, p.44). Indeed, previous research argues that when visitors are involved in creating their own experiences, they are more attentive and thus more likely to gain richer experiences (Patterson & Bitgood, 1988). This was found to be the case in the present study.

80

The engaging experiences reported by respondents were strongly influenced by the role of tour guides and respondents' participation in value-added activities associated with the region's heritage buildings. Some respondents also gained engaging experiences related to their specialist interests in the region's heritage buildings, while the majority of respondents actively sought to remember their experiences of the region's heritage buildings, for example, by taking photographs of the buildings. The following sub-themes; `the role of tour guides and value-added activities'; `educational experiences'; `capturing the gaze' and `specialist interest experiences' allowed respondents to gain psychological and mindful connections or `engaging' experiences between the heritage buildings and themselves, and to interact with the buildings on a more intimate level. Rather than gaining passive experiences, the region's heritage buildings allowed these respondents to engage mindfully with the buildings, and thus play a role themselves in customising the nature of experiences they were gaining. It is argued that these experiences are highly important, as Erdley & Kesterson-Towners (2003) argue that these engaging experiences offer powerful personal experiences that, importantly, allow tourists to gain highly demanded individualised experiences. 5.5.1: The Role of Tour-Guides and Value-Added Activities. Analysis of the interviews showed that value added activities, such as the annual Art Deco Weekend, guided tours, the showing of videos, and the availability of heritage souvenirs, strongly enhanced the nature of experiences gained through the heritage buildings. In particular, it was found that the tour guides, particularly of the Art Deco guided walk in Napier were of value to the experience of respondents. Comments included, "The tour guide was great, really knowledgeable, which really was good"; "The guide was really good; she was very interesting and told some really interesting stories". An important point is illustrated by this quote given by one respondent, "We picked up a lot from the tour that we couldn't have got from just walking around ourselves". This illustrates that the tour guides can, and indeed, perhaps were heightening the nature of experiences gained from the heritage buildings. Indeed, Fine and Speer

81

(1985) argue that the power of a tour guide's words results in `site sacralization' of the objects of focus. In other words, Hawke's Bay's tour guides make the heritage buildings an even stronger part of tourists' experiences by enhancing the experiences gained, and increasing the perceived `awe' of the region's heritage buildings. In particular, it was the stories and information given by tour guides that enhanced the experiences gained by respondents. Respondents' narratives that illustrated this included "The buildings that were talked about by the tour guide really stood out, such as the ASB Bank. That was a fascinating story"; "It was interesting to find out about the Maori carvings on the bank at the start of the tour"; "I guess on the walking tour, I could take in what the city was all about and it was nice that they were so focused on the details of the buildings and pulling out those moments ­ street specific" and, "We looked inside the buildings to learn more things about the history. I mean to learn more about 1931 and the earthquake and so on and so forth, that was very interesting!". Indeed, the way in which the tour guides were dressed further enhanced the gaze of the heritage buildings amongst some respondents; "The tour guide was all dressed up and wore a bowler hat. That added to the experience!" Similarly, other value-added activities associated with the heritage buildings acted as enhancements of respondents' experiences. For instance, the videos shown of Napier's history and Art Deco, shown in The Art Deco Shop and Hawke's Bay Museum, provided in richer detail, stories relating to the history of the area. One respondent described; "The other interesting thing was this memoirs video we watched and there were these four people that had lived through the earthquake, three ladies and a guy and they were all in their eighties and one in their nineties, the different experiences that they had and their reminiscences that they had; it was fascinating. One lady was particularly fascinating because her father had a camera and he was the one that took the photographs immediately after the earthquake before the fire started".

82

Another respondent recalled an interesting encounter with a local; "The taxi driver who was driving us last night was telling us that he lived here and his father lived here during that earthquake, and he told us about his father's experience, which I found fascinating. The night after the earthquake where the father lived was damaged and the walls went a bit skewed. The night after the earthquake, the father and his wife came into town to see what it looked like and there was an aftershock and he thought later on `how stupid we were to go in there' ­ he obviously didn't think about it! To me that was interesting ­ it was anecdotal". Personal accounts of history such as these provided authenticity to the historical experience gained. As shown in the above narratives, respondents could relate to the `human element' of the region's history. As illustrated, these personal accounts can be particularly memorable for respondents, and thus the role of tour guides and value-added experiences in facilitating the heritage building experience cannot be underrated. Furthermore, the above section also presents the experiential nature of townscape through interaction; that is, respondents were able to gain experiences through using the heritage buildings as a platform to interact with other parties. 5.5.2: Educational Experiences. For some respondents, the combination of stories, sense of culture and history of the heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay culminated in an educational experience. In particular, respondents were able to learn about the history of Hawke's Bay, such as the Napier Earthquake, and were able to visualise New Zealand's society in the 1930's. As previously discussed, the heritage buildings' architecture also gave some respondents an insight into Maori, Incan, and European cultures. Respondents' narratives included "We were saying the buildings show the history of your town and it gives a touch of history to the place, and that's nice to see... there's more history here than in other districts of New Zealand, it all adds to your experience, the knowledge of the whole country"; "Yeah it makes the trip more interesting if we can learn things as we travel around"; "It's interesting to think how New Zealand must have been in the 1930's, it must have been such a conservative place", and "I like to learn more about a country". Richards and

83

Wilson (Article in Press) argue that increasing amounts of consumers are travelling searching for engaging experiences, which can help their personal development through an increased understanding of history. These tourists enjoy educational opportunities and often travel primarily to engage in a learning experience directly related to the destination that they are travelling (Bodger, 2000). As has been discussed, some respondents viewed the heritage buildings as providing a type of history lacking in New Zealand, and with the buildings comprising blends of cultures, interesting stories, unique architecture, the unique history of Napier's earthquake, and New Zealand's history in general, it was found through analysis of interviews, to some respondents interested in learning, the heritage buildings provided multi faceted educational experiences that were of significant interest. 5.5.3: Capturing the `Gaze'/Experience. While some tourists treasured the educational experiences gained from Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings, the majority of respondents wished to somehow preserve the personal and meaningful memories of their experiences of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings. Since "They make a nice picture", many respondents said they had taken a number of photos of the heritage buildings and `captured the gaze'; "We've taken a whole film of the buildings, would you like to see them?" and "They are unusual and aren't straight, so you can play around with the colour and the angles". Indeed, tourism and photography are inextricably connected, as can be seen by the stereotypical image of a tourist hampered by a range of photography equipment (Markwell, 1997) in an attempt to capture the `gaze' (Urry, 1990). Garlick (2002) suggests that one of the main reasons tourists take photographs is to assign their own meaning to a certain object. It is significant to note that even for those respondents with little or no interest, the heritage buildings still formed part of their narrative of the region; through the form of the photographs they took of the buildings as well as their recount of the nature of their experience. Comments included, "I'm not that interested you know, but I took the photos to say I was there ­ look at me Mum!" and "The architecture was special, not that I was crazy about art, but it was special and I took some photographs".

84

Furthermore, it is important to note that due to the `iconic' nature of the region's heritage buildings, and in particular Napier's Art Deco buildings, a number of respondents simply came to the region so they could say they've seen the buildings; "I've just come to the region because I've heard it has Art Deco and I thought I'd check it out". As previously discussed, a number of tourists simply travel to experience the distinct, and in essence, the taking of photographs allowed respondents to prove to others that they had experienced the unique. This has important implications for why people travel to visit a region in the first place. The fact that a large number of respondents took photographs of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings accentuates the visual attraction of the region. It is of importance that respondents found the buildings photogenic, as "photography is a major factor in the construction of the tourist gaze, because it has the power to reinforce and sometimes even alter the gaze" (Brecken, 2005, p.22). Sontag (1977) adds that tourists take photographs to provide "indisputable evidence that the trip was made, the program was carried out, that fun was had" (p.9). Tourists have a degree of control over the evidence that they bring back from their experience, and one way in which this occurs is through their selection of particular images to photograph (ibid). According to Sontag (1977), "most tourists feel compelled to put a camera between themselves and whatever is remarkable they encounter (p. 9-10)". Furthermore, tourists generally show their photographs to friends and family. This reinforces the tourist gaze of a region, as these photographs act as free promotion for the region (ibid). In essence, the experiences gained from Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings are likely to be prolonged through the taking of photographs, as tourists can then use them to trigger warm memories of experiences gained while in the region. Indeed, it should be noted that experiences do not occur solely at the time of consumption; part of any experience is relaying and reliving the emotions felt during consumption after the experience, through means such as photographs (Arnould & Price, 1993; Collier, 1999; Swarbrooke & Horner, 1999; Erdley & Kesterson-Townes, 2003).

85

5.5.4: Specialist Interests in Heritage Buildings. A small minority of respondents, such as one working for National Geographic, and other professional photographers reported that they had a `specialist interest' in taking photographs of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings. Specialist interest tourism occurs when a traveller is motivated by a yearning to "either indulge in an existing interest or develop a new interest in a novel, or familiar location" (Swarbrooke & Horner, 1999, p.38). For instance, 13.7% of questionnaire respondents belonged to at least one cultural or heritage group. The most common of these was the United Kingdom's National Trust, which according to one respondent, "deals with the preservation of natural and historic scenery, including houses". For these respondents, their experiences of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings were generally enhanced by their interest in, and knowledge of their respective heritage groups, and Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings allowed them to engage in experiences related specifically to their interests. Not surprisingly, previous research confirms that tourists are more likely to travel to destinations and visit objects that are in line with their interests (Patterson & Bitgood, 1988). Moreover, some respondents mentioned they had a particular interest in architecture, and thus were interested in the architects associated with certain buildings. In particular, Charles Rennie MackIntosh and Louis Hay were most commonly mentioned by respondents; "The interesting thing I thought was that this Hay bloke ­ there is a heck of a lot that he designed and seems to be responsible for in Napier. It was interesting that this one guy, he must have had a vision" and "I love the Art Deco style and Charles MackIntosh, I've got loads of MackIntosh in the bedroom". Indeed, a small number of respondents were professional architects and thus `gazed' at the buildings through specialist eyes; "In our town, we are going to be building a soundshell and I like the fact that you have a soundshell that is true to the period. I was thinking about how I could take some of that back". Essentially, it is important to recognise that certain specialist interest respondents are drawn to Hawke's Bay's heritage, and their particular interests are likely to reflect the experiences sought as well as their resulting narratives.

86

5.6: Improving the Heritage Building Experience. Although the above discussion of key themes emerging from respondents' narratives illustrate that respondents gained a wide range of experiences from Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings, findings showed that respondents also described opportunities to further enhance the nature of experiences gained. This section will therefore present the reported recommendations as to how these experiences may be improved. It must be noted however, that no negative comments were revealed in the interview transcripts about any of the activities associated with heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay. Moreover, it was found that 20.6% of questionnaire respondents stated that they would like to see more activities created associated with the heritage buildings. Many of the suggestions made on the questionnaires related to the enhancement of existing activities. Suggestions included evening guided tours, the changing of street signs to 1930's style, dance events held in the buildings, and more festivals incorporating items from the 1930's, such as jazz bands and vintage cars. Essentially, a number of suggestions expressed the demand for authenticity of the 1930's experience. Value-added items such as jazz bands and vintage cars were reported to add authenticity to the nature of a number of experiences gained by respondents from the heritage buildings. The most common suggestion for the improvement of the heritage building experience was for the opportunity to see more of the interiors of the heritage buildings. Respondents' narratives described: "Well we've only been inside one which is where we're staying, so the internal quality of these places; I mean I'd love to go inside some of these older houses but haven't had the opportunity. I think I would have liked to be able to see inside more of them"; and " You look at the outsides of them but it would also be nice to get a feeling of what they look like on the inside as well". It appears that certain respondents wished for a `more complete' heritage building experience including interior tours of the buildings, perhaps because they sought a fuller `story' of each building. Because Hawke's Bay is a `living city' a number of the heritage buildings interiors have been modernised. However, when asked if "the interiors would still be of interest if they

87

had been largely modernised", opinion was mixed. Comments regarding this included; "We've just been saying that it would be nice to see inside some of the buildings, but I suppose if they haven't kept the original features inside them, there's no point in really recreating it" and, "Well obviously we live in a modern world and if you want to change the interiors, fine, but don't change the façade. You should keep that looking like it does". This illustrates the importance of authenticity to the experience of a region and almost articulates that international tourists believe the authentic story of a region is in the authentic fabric of buildings. For some respondents, being able to see the interiors of more buildings would help them to get a more `living history' experience of the heritage buildings, as there was interest in looking at how these heritage buildings had been adapted for the modern world, and what they were now being used for. Narrative included "It's nice to see people and their interaction ­ it's nice to see the people using the town as a town rather than as it just being a theme park. It's not good just seeing buildings with no people ­ they're being used, they're not just attractions for people who just visit and leave at the end of the day"; " They're being lived in and used as shops and hotels and things"; and, "To come into a town and see buildings of this period that are still here, its quite great ­ but with a modern use ­ they're not just standing there doing nothing, it's interesting". Similarly, Fisher's (2002) study of Levuka, Fiji, found that tourists enjoy the ambience of heritage buildings in `living cities' and welcome the fact that these buildings have a modern use. Although, Corrigan (1997) warns that care must be taken as to any disruption to the lives of people working in the buildings, as people do not like being part of the uncontrolled tourist gaze. The authenticity of experience is therefore important, although there appears to be a degree of acceptance amongst most respondents that aspects of the buildings will inevitably change over time, and interior tours, although perhaps not historically authentic, it appears, would further enhance the experiences of interested respondents and add value to their experience of the region. In whatever state, preserved or modernised, it appears international tourists perceive heritage buildings as being able to deliver authentic stories of the region. Furthermore, activities associated with heritage buildings that provide positive experiences to people are important not only for tourism, but for the

88

preservation of heritage. This is because, on many occasions, when people participate in events, their attitudes towards the worth of heritage becomes more favourable and appreciation is heightened for heritage (Janiskee, 1996). As was perhaps to be expected, the heritage buildings in Hastings District formed a less substantial part of respondents' narratives than those in Napier. This was due to factors such as the perceived `iconic' status of Napier's buildings and fewer activities associated with the buildings available for the respondents in Hastings. It may also be a consequence of regional branding and promotional efforts. When asked in the photograph-supported interviews to select any photographs that they felt most strongly represented their experiences of the region, 29 out of the 37 (78.4%) respondents who were interviewed whilst in Napier selected at least one photograph of a heritage building unprompted. Conversely, 17 out of 28 (60.7%) respondents in Hastings District selected at least one photograph of a heritage building, and of these 17 respondents, 13 (76.5%) selected at least one photograph of Napier's heritage buildings. While it should be noted that there were more photographs of Napier's heritage buildings in the selection, these findings, and indeed the interviews held in Hastings, show that when discussing heritage buildings, respondents nearly always focused on Napier. However, it is important to note that comments received about Hastings' heritage buildings were positive. The Spanish Mission style of architecture, in particular, was enjoyed by the majority of interview respondents who selected at least one photograph of a heritage building in Hastings District. Comments included "That pattern strikes me as being a bit of a Mexican thing and it is pleasurable to look at, I like it"; "The Spanish Mission look, while not as out there as Art Deco, just makes it unique and makes you think of that time period"; "Those arches are just magnificent, I like the Spanish style, you know, with the great overhanging arches", and, "I love the architecture, it looks really nice and it's a Spanish sort of thing in Hastings, it looks really pretty, it looks really cool". However, it appears that while Hastings' heritage buildings are of interest to respondents and did form an integral part of the tourism experience, a number of respondents missed the opportunities to see them because they did not know of their presence. For instance,

89

comments made by respondents included, "Do you have heritage buildings here? Where?"; "I think you have some real gems here, they're a bit harder to find though"; "I didn't expect to see anything like this here, it was a pleasant surprise though"; "I think they're more hidden here, they're more on show in Napier"; and "I'm surprised there's so many of them (heritage buildings) in Hastings. I really was thinking they'd be mostly in Napier, so maybe Hastings needs to make a bit more of it". Indeed, it appears there is an opportunity to enhance the profile of Hastings' heritage buildings. Essentially though, the experiences provided must offer something unique from Napier's heritage buildings, as tourists seek out areas that provide new experiences, and thus may not concern themselves with coming to Hastings if their buildings provide nothing new experientially. They too need to deliver the authentic local story. Furthermore, one issue of concern for Hastings District is word-of-mouth recommendation. Comments by interview respondents included "We asked if we should go to Hastings and we were told there's nothing to do there, don't waste your time" and, "The owner of our home-stay sort of commented that there wasn't much to do in Hastings, and not to waste time there. That clouded our perception from the outset". The last comment is an important point; that negative word of mouth can cloud peoples' perceptions of the nature of experiences a destination can provide. As demonstrated, the experiences of Hastings, such as those gained from the area's heritage buildings are of value to respondents. Thus, it can be argued that the negative comments about Hastings given by New Zealanders are possible examples of the `cultural cringe' reported in recent cultural tourism research in New Zealand (Tourism New Zealand, 2003). There is a need therefore to present to local communities the relative value of their heritage buildings to the tourism experience, even if buildings remain preserved for the cultural consumption of international tourists only, as purported by Fisher (2002). 5.7 Chapter Conclusion. This chapter has determined that international tourists gained a range of experiences from Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings; namely; visual, personal reflections and engaging

90

experiences. Through the use of photograph-prompted interviews, this chapter has also demonstrated the value of heritage buildings to international tourists' narratives and experiences of a region. It is apparent that the experiences gained from Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings form a significant part of many respondents' narratives, and even respondents who had little interest or interaction with the region's heritage buildings gained memorable experiences through their presence, as demonstrated in their narratives. This chapter has argued that because a number of respondents felt the heritage buildings reminded them of their own heritage, essentially they imbue their experience with aspects relevant or familiar to them personally; becoming of personal importance. In terms of advancing scholarly discourse, this chapter has analysed the under-researched area of experiences of heritage buildings within a wider townscape, and has argued that heritage buildings are particularly valuable tourism assets, as experientially, they have the potential to benefit all visitors. Importantly, findings of the research have been generated from the `thick descriptions' of respondents, ensuring that themes are described by respondents themselves. This chapter found that the visual aspect of heritage buildings certainly constituted a substantial part of a number of respondents' gazes (Urry, 2004). However, the experiential nature of townscapes constitutes more than just a visual gaze; it has found that that townscapes are interactive and experiential spaces whereby international tourists imbue their own personality and history onto the experiences gained, thus gaining highly personalised experiences that are of personal significance and importance.

91

Chapter Six: Determining International Tourists' Levels of Interest in Heritage Building Attributes and the Prominent Experiences Gained . 6.1: Introduction. To validate and support the qualitative findings, quantitative research to provide representative opinion is often deemed appropriate (Denzin, 1978; McClintock & Greene, 1985; Jayaratne & Stewart, 1991; Walle, 1997; McIntosh, 1998; Jennings, 2001). This chapter will present and discuss the findings from analysis of the 354 questionnaires completed by international tourists in Hawke's Bay. Specifically, this chapter will discuss the most prominent experiences gained by respondents, and the attributes of heritage buildings that were deemed to be of most interest to respondents. This chapter builds upon the findings from the qualitative results discussed in Chapter Five, as it focuses on the ranking of attributes deemed of most interest to visitors, and determines the most prominent experiences gained by respondents in their engagement with heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay. The chapter will also determine any relationships between attributes, experiences gained from heritage buildings, and respondents' demographic variables, such as gender, level of education, and age, to profile any significant differences between market segments. 6.2: International Tourists' Levels of Interest in Heritage Building Attributes. Questionnaire respondents were asked to indicate their level of interest in a range of heritage building attributes. As can be seen from Table 6.1, the largest percentage of respondents indicated that they were most interested in the `architecture of heritage buildings' (N= 308; 94.5% were very interested or interested). Respondents' also indicated a high level of interest in `the stories the heritage buildings contained' (N = 287; 87.7% were very interested or interested) and `the history associated with them' (N= 282; 86.8% were very interested or interested). Furthermore, as previously evidenced in analysis of the qualitative research, a significant proportion of questionnaire respondents indicated they were very interested in heritage buildings because they had the `desire to

92

see something different' (N = 263; 81.2% were very interested or interested). The attributes of heritage buildings that respondents were least interested in were `the age of the buildings' (N= 190; 58.8% were very interested or interested), and `to see what purpose they were being used for' (N= 188; 58.6% were very interested or interested). Interestingly, very few respondents were disinterested or very disinterested in any of the attributes listed in the questionnaire. It appears that those aspects of heritage buildings that were of most interest to respondents were those that engaged the visitor in a potentially mindful way; interest in architecture, the stories and history associated with the buildings, visual exteriors and the desire to see something different. As discussed in Chapter Five, respondents were able to imbue their own past onto the buildings; the interpretation of architecture and the history associated with the heritage buildings. Thus, it could be argued that international tourists are most interested in those attributes of heritage buildings that potentially will allow them to gain highly personal and memorable experiences. Of least interest to respondents were attributes that potentially give them less engagement with the buildings, such as discovering their age and to see what purpose the buildings are being used for. Arguably, if the level of engagement was increased for these attributes, for example, by offering interior tours where tourists could have a more complete understanding of the modern use of the buildings, levels of interest might increase.

93

Table 6.1: Respondents' Level of Interest in Heritage Building Attributes.
Heritage Building Attributes Very Interested N % N % Interested Neither Interested or Disinterested N % Disinterested N % Very Disinterested N % Not Given Mean Std. Dev.

Architecture The stories they contain The history associated with them The exteriors of the buildings The desire to see something different The interiors of the buildings They may help me learn about the region They may help me learn about the country The colours of the buildings The age of the buildings To see what purpose the buildings are being used for

149 (45.7) 125 (38.2) 118 (36.3)

159 (48.8) 162 (49.5) 164 (50.5)

14 36 39

(4.3) (11.0) (12.0)

3 3 1

(0.9) (0.9) (0.3)

0 0 1

(0.0) (0.0) (0.3)

28 27 29

1.48 1.61 1.63

0.735 0.805 0.821

104 (32.0) 95 (29.3)

180 (55.2) 168 (51.9)

39 54

(12.0) (16.7)

2 5

(0.6) (1.5)

0 1

(0.0) (0.3)

28 30

1.67 1.75

0.798 0.886

93 (28.4) 77 (23.7)

172 (52.6) 190 (58.5)

53 51

(16.2) (14.4)

8 6

(2.3) (1.8)

0 0

(0.0) (0.0)

27 29

1.78 1.8

0.874 0.848

76 (23.4)

183 (56.3)

60

(18.5)

5

(1.5)

0

(0.0)

29

1.82

0.860

81 (24.8) 38 (11.8) 40 (12.5)

163 (49.8) 152 (47.0) 148 (46.1)

69

(21.1)

12 24 27

(3.7) (7.4) (8.4)

1 4 8

(0.3) (1.2) (24.9)

27 31 33

1.89 2.18 2.20

0.939 1.048 1.112

104 (32.2) 97 (30.2)

Note: Means were calculated as per Likert-scales, with 1.0 meaning every respondent indicated being `very interested', and 5.0 meaning every respondent indicated being `very disinterested'.

94

6.3: Influences on International Tourists' Levels of Interest in Heritage Building Attributes. As shown in Table 6.1, respondents reported being interested in a wide range of heritage building attributes. This sub-section will determine significant differences between the attributes of heritage buildings that different respondents found to be of interest, so that differences between market segments can be elucidated. Overall respondents' ages and whether or not they had been on a guided tour were found to have the most frequent and significant influence on respondents' reported levels of interest in attributes of the heritage buildings (see Table 6.2). There was found to be statistically significant relationships between respondents' age and their levels of `interest in architecture' (chi-square = 4.924; significant at .026; Cramer's V = .139); the `history associated with heritage buildings' (chi-square = 5.558; significant at .018; Cramer's V = .142); `the exteriors of the buildings' (chi-square = 14.017; significant at .000; Cramer's V = .219) and, `the interiors of buildings' (chisquare = 12.349; significant at .000; Cramer's V = .204). As might be expected, older visitors were slightly more likely to be interested in these aspects than younger visitors. Specifically, slightly more respondents aged over 50 years indicated being very interested or interested in `the architecture of heritage buildings' (N = 112; 99.1%), compared to those aged less than 50 years (N = 193; 92.8%). A slightly higher proportion of respondents aged 50 or over also reported being very interested or interested in `the history associated with heritage buildings' (N = 106; 93.8%), compared to those aged under 50 (N = 173; 84.0%). Similarly, a slightly higher proportion of respondents aged 50 or over reported being very interested or interested in `the exteriors of heritage buildings' (N = 110; 97.3%), compared to those aged under 50 (N = 171; 82.2%). A higher proportion of respondents aged 50 or over were also found to reportedly be very interested or interested in `the interiors of heritage buildings' (N = 105; 92.1%), compared to those aged less than 50 (N = 157; 75.5%).

95

Table 6.2: Influences on International Tourists' Levels of Interest in Heritage Building Attributes.
Heritage Building Attributes Architecture _ Gender Age Ed qual Cultural Group _ Nights spent in Hawke's Bay _ Visited Hawke's Bay Before _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Guided Tour Self Guide Walk Self Guide Drive Nation Group Size Main Travel Accom Style

4.924 .026 .139_

_

The stories they contain The history associated with them The exteriors of the buildings The desire to see something different The interiors of the buildings They may help me learn about the region They may help me learn about the country The colours of the buildings The age of the buildings To see what purpose the buildings are being used for

_

_

_

_

_

5.058 .025 .136+
_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

5.558 .018 .14214.017 .000 2.19-

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

4.524 .033 .134-

_

_

_

10.526 .001 .187+

_

_

15.962 .001 .237+

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

4.307 .038 .124-

12.349 .000 .204-

_

_

_

_

16.013 .000 .217+

_

_

10.407 6.798 .015 .009 .192+ .184+

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

4.975 .026 .132_

_

_

_

_

_

4.901 .027 .131+
_

6.620 .010 .150+
_

_

17.54 .001 .248+
_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

Note: The figures shown in the table above denote: Two Sample Chi-square value (only shown when these are <0.05) Significance level Cramer's V coefficient / direction of effect (+ positive; - negative; * not discernable)

96

Whilst the differences in interest in heritage building attributes by respondents' age were slight, they do show variation among the international visitor market based on age. These differences may be attributed to older respondents feeling they may be able to relive personal memories from using these attributes as a trigger (Beeho & Prentice, 1997). This is pertinent, as visitors aged over 55 years of age form a significant proportion of the international tourism market in Hawke's Bay (see Chapter Four). However, it should be emphasised that the majority of visitors aged under 55 years also showed an interest in the listed heritage building attributes. Furthermore, Table 6.2. shows that a number of significant relationships existed between whether respondents had been on a guided tour, and their level of interest in a number of heritage building attributes; namely; `the stories contained within the heritage buildings' (chi-square = 5.058; significant at .025; Cramer's V = .136); `the exteriors of the buildings' (chi-square = 10.526; significant at .001; Cramer's V = .187); `the interiors of the buildings' (chi-square = 16.013; significant at .000; Cramer's V = .217), and `the colours of the buildings' (chi-square = 4.901; significant at .027; Cramer's V = .131). This significant difference is perhaps due to the fact that respondents on these tours may have been rendered more mindful or became more interested in those aspects as a result of their interaction with the tour guide (Fine & Speer, 1985; Moscardo, 1996). This was certainly found to be the case in the analysis of the qualitative interviews (Chapter Five). It should be noted that the term used in the questionnaire, `guided tour', may be interpreted as being a fairly general term. However, by far the most popular guided tour available in Hawke's Bay is the Art Deco Tour. These tours generally last for between one and two hours, and respondents are shown around the streets in downtown Napier by tour guides. Tourists can also choose to self-guide or self-drive themselves around Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings, by purchasing booklets containing information on the heritage buildings in the area. Despite the Art Deco Tour promising `some interior visits' (Art Deco Trust, 2005), only fifteen questionnaire respondents indicated participating in a `building interior tour'. The sample size was thus too small to use this variable in analysis of the data. Thus, future research is required on the influence of interior building tours on international tourists' experiences of Hawke's Bay.

97

It was found that a slightly higher proportion of respondents who had been on a `guided tour' indicated being very interested or interested in `the stories contained within the heritage buildings' (N= 84; 95.5%), compared to respondents who had not been on a guided tour (N= 203; 85.7%). Furthermore, a higher proportion of respondents who had been on a guided tour indicated being very interested or interested in `the exteriors of heritage buildings' (N= 86; 97.7%), compared to those who had not been on a guided tour (N=197; 83.5%). Similarly, a higher proportion of respondents who had been on a guided tour reported being very interested or interested in `the interiors of heritage buildings' (N= 84; 95.5%), when compared to respondents that had not been on a guided tour (N= 180; 75.9%). Respondents that had been on a guided tour were also more likely to report being very interested or interested in `the colours of heritage buildings' (N= 74; 84.1%), compared to respondents who had not been on a guided tour (N= 169; 71.3%). As such, it appears that tour guides may have a significant role in shaping visitors' interest in attributes of a region's historic built environment, although this requires further validation. Moreover, gender was found to have a significant relationship with respondents' level of interest in `the interiors of heritage buildings' (chi-square = 4.307; significant at .038; Cramer's V = .124) and `the colours of the buildings' (chi-square = 4.975; significant at .026; Cramer's V = .132). Specifically, more females indicated being very interested or interested in `the interiors of heritage buildings' (N= 144; 86.2%), compared to males (N= 118; 76.6%). Furthermore, more females indicated being very interested or interested in `the colours of heritage buildings' (N= 135; 80.8%), compared to males (N= 107; 69.5%). Further research is required to validate the findings drawn here, as the relationships noted were generally weak statistically (as shown by the relatively low Cramer's V statistics). Previous research has shown that females are more interested in the domestic aspects of heritage (Beeho & Prentice, 1995) and, thus, females may find the interiors of buildings of more interest than males and be more attracted to the visual appeal and colours of the buildings. For all other heritage building attributes, there were no reported differences between males and females, as might be expected from a general townscape setting.

98

Furthermore, nationality was found to have a significant relationship with respondents' level of interest in `the exteriors of heritage buildings' (chi-square = 15.962; significant at .001; Cramer's V = .237), `the interiors of heritage buildings' (chi-square= 10.407; significant at .015; Cramer's V= .192) and `the colours of the buildings' (chi-square = 17.451; significant at .001; Cramer's V= .248). Specifically, a higher proportion of Australians indicated being very interested or interested in `the exteriors of heritage buildings' (N= 40; 100.0%) compared to respondents from Europe (N= 77; 87.5%), the United Kingdom (N= 96; 85.7%) and North America (N= 30; 69.8%). A higher proportion of Australians also indicated being very interested or interested in `the interiors of heritage buildings' (N= 37; 92.5%), compared to respondents from the United Kingdom (N= 93; 83.0), Europe (N= 65; 73.9%) and North America (N= 29; 67.4%); and `the colours of the buildings' (N= 38; 95.0%), compared with respondents from Europe (N= 68; 77.3%), the United Kingdom (N= 84; 75.0%) and North America (N= 24; 55.8%). These findings suggest that respondents from Australia appeared to be more interested in certain attributes than other nationalities, possibly because Australia has markedly different styles of architecture than what is found in Hawke's Bay. Thus, the opportunity to `gaze upon the distinct' may have been particularly strong amongst Australians. The only significant relationship between level of interest in attributes of heritage buildings and respondents' level of education was in relation to interest in `the exteriors of heritage buildings' (chi-square = 4.524; significant at .033; Cramer's V = .134). It was found that a slightly higher proportion of respondents holding a tertiary degree (partially completed or completed) or post-graduate qualification, indicated being very interested or interested in `the exteriors of heritage buildings' (206; 90.4%), compared to respondents whose highest level of education was secondary school education, or trade certificate (61; 80.3%). However, this finding should not be exaggerated as the relationship was found to be weak, and the majority of respondents held an interest in these attributes irrespective of their level of education.

99

Whilst tour guides potentially have an influence on visitors' level of interest in heritage buildings, the same was not found for respondents who had conducted a self-guided walk. Only one notable exception was found in analysis of the questionnaire data. Specifically, this was found to be a statistically significant relationship between respondents who had conducted a self-guided walk and their level of interest in `the colours of the buildings' (chi-square = 6.620; significant at .010; Cramer's V = .150). A slightly higher proportion of respondents who had been on a self-guided walk reported being very interested or interested in `the colours of heritage buildings' (N= 103; 42.4%), compared to those who had not been on a self-guided walk (N= 21; 25.6%). Potentially, this is because certain heritage buildings would have been noticed or drawn attention to as part of the self-guided walk that may otherwise have gone unnoticed in a less structured walk around the region. Similarly, there was only one significant relationship between level of interest in attributes of heritage buildings and the size of group respondents were travelling in. This was in relation to the interest in `the interiors of the buildings' (chi-square = 6.798; significant at .009; Cramer's V= .184). Specifically, a higher proportion of respondents travelling alone or as a couple indicated being very interested or interested in `the interiors of the buildings' (N= 154; 88.0%), compared to those travelling in a group size of three or more (N= 21; 56.8%). This finding may be because those travelling in larger groups must accommodate the needs of all members of the group, and thus may not have the perceived required time to view building interiors. Interestingly, there were no significant differences in the reported levels of interest in heritage building attributes and respondents' memberships to cultural groups, type of accommodation used in Hawke's Bay, whether respondents had been on a self-guided drive, and travel style. Furthermore, no significant differences were found between the number of nights spent in the region, and whether respondents had visited Hawke's Bay before. As such, visitors to the region appear to hold an interest in these attributes irrespective of these variables.

100

6.4: International Tourists' Levels of Interest in Different Types of Heritage Buildings. As previously discussed in Chapter Five, it appeared that, generally, most respondents were interested in the Art Deco style of heritage buildings available in Hawke's Bay. However, due to the wide variety of heritage buildings present in Hawke's Bay, it was of importance to determine the levels of interest respondents had in alternative styles of heritage building found in the region. As can be evidenced by Table 6.3, it was indeed the `Art Deco' style that the largest proportion of respondents indicated being `very interested or interested in' (N= 269; 82.8%). While there were a number of respondents who indicated they were `very interested or interested' in the other listed styles of heritage buildings; namely, `Victorian' (N= 232; 71.8%), `Spanish Mission' (N= 211; 65.3%), and `commercial Heritage' buildings (N = 203; 62.9%), these styles did not hold the same level of interest among respondents' as that of the `Art Deco' Style. Table 6.3: Level of Interest in Different Types of Heritage Buildings.
Style of Heritage Building Art Deco Very Interested Interested Neither Interested or Disinterested Disinterested Strongly Disinterested Not Given Mean Std Dev

N

%

N

%

N

%

N 8

% (2.5)

N 3 1 4 1

% (0.9) (0.3) (1.2) (0.3)

28 30 30 30

1.72 1.98 2.07 2.10

0924 0.935 0.999 0.967

112 (34.5)
Victorian Spanish Mission Commercial Buildings

157 (48.3) 179 (55.4) 161 (49.8) 163 (50.5)

45 (13.8) 78 (24.1) 95 (29.4) 104 (32.2)

53 (16.4) 50 (15.5) 40 (12.4)

12 (3.7) 13 (4.0) 15 (4.6)

6.5: Influences on International Tourists' Levels of Interest in Different Types of Heritage Buildings. A guided tour was found to have the most influence in terms of respondents' indicated levels of interest in different types of heritage buildings (see Table 6.4). Those respondents who had been on a guided tour were found to have a greater `level of interest

101

in Art Deco buildings' (chi-square = 8.278; significant at .042; Cramer's V = .167); `Spanish Mission buildings' (chi-square = 8.507; significant at .004; Cramer's V = .107), and `commercial buildings'. (chi-square= 4.602; significant at .032; Cramer's V= .127). Perhaps not surprisingly, it was found that a higher proportion of respondents who had been on a guided tour reported being very interested or interested in `Art Deco buildings' (N= 82; 93.2%), compared to those who had not been on a guided tour (N=186; 78.8%). A higher proportion of respondents who had been on a guided tour also indicated being very interested or interested in `Spanish Mission buildings' (N= 69; 78.4%), compared to those who had not been on a guided tour (N= 141; 60.3%). Similarly, a higher proportion of respondents (N = 64; 72.7%) who had been on a guided tour indicated being either very interested or interested in `commercial buildings', compared to those who had not been on a guided tour (N= 138; 59.0%). As proposed earlier, this may be a result of respondents' being rendered more mindful during these experiences as well as these styles of buildings being a key feature of Hawke's Bay's guided tours. Table 6.4: Influences on Level of Interest in Different Types of Heritage Buildings.
Style of Heritage Building Gender Age Ed Qual Culture Group Nights spent in Bay Visited Hawke's Before Guided Tour Self Walk Self Nation Group Size

Main Accom

Travel Style

Guided Drive

Hawke's Bay

Art Deco

6.466 .011 .151_ 5.655 .017 .140_

14.017 .000 .219_ _ 5.799 .016 .142-

6.406 .033 .134_ 8.387 .004 .175_

_

_

_

8.278 .042 .167+ _ 8.507 .004 .107+ 4.602 .032 .127+

5.750 .016 .142+ _ _ _

_

_

_

_

_

Victorian Spanish Mission Commerc ial Buildings

_ _ _

_ _ _

_ _ _

_ _ _

_ _ 13.787 .003 .221+

_ _ _

_ _ _

_ _ _

Note: The figures shown in the table above denote: Two Sample Chi-square value (only shown when these are <0.05)
Significance level Cramer's V coefficient / direction of effect (+ positive; - negative; * not discernable)

102

Interestingly, there were also found to be significant relationships between respondents' gender, and their levels of interest in `Art Deco' (chi-square = 6.466; significant at .011; Cramer's V = .151) and `Spanish Mission' buildings (chi-square = 5.655; significant at .017; Cramer's V = .140; see Table 6.4.). It was found that a slightly higher proportion of female respondents indicated being very interested or interested in `Art Deco' buildings (N= 147; 88.6%), compared to male respondents (N= 119; 77.3%). Similarly, it was found that a higher proportion of female respondents were very interested or interested in `Spanish Mission' buildings (N= 119; 72.1%), compared to male respondents (N = 90; 58.8%). Potentially, females hold greater interest in certain visual styles of buildings. However, as a majority of both males and females reported an interest in these styles of buildings, care should be taken in interpreting these findings. Significant relationships were also found between respondents' age, and their level of interest in `Art Deco' buildings (chi-square = 14.017; significant at .000; Cramer's V = .219), and `commercial buildings' (chi-square = 5.799; significant at .016; Cramer's V = .142). It was found that a higher proportion of respondents aged 50 years or over indicated being very interested or interested in `Art Deco' buildings (N= 105; 92.1%), compared with respondents aged less than 50 years (N= 161; 77.8%). Furthermore, a higher proportion of respondents aged over 50 years (N= 80; 72.1%) reported being very interested or interested in `commercial buildings', compared to those aged under 50 (N= 120; 57.7%). This again may potentially be because older respondents have lived through a time when these styles of buildings were more common, and thus had an interest in buildings that could act as a trigger for them to reminisce upon fond memories (Beeho & Prentice, 1997). There were found to be significant relationships between respondents' level of education, and `interest in Art Deco buildings' (chi-square = 6.406; significant at .033; Cramer's V = .134), and `Spanish Mission buildings' (chi-square = 8.387; significant at .004; Cramer's V = .175). A higher proportion of respondents with a tertiary degree (completed or partially-completed), or post-graduate qualification indicated being very interested or interested in `Art Deco' buildings (N= 196; 86.0%), compared to those whose highest

103

level of education was a high school education, or trade certificate (N= 55; 72.4%). Similarly, a higher proportion of respondents with a tertiary degree (completed or partially-completed), or post-graduate qualification indicated being very interested or interested in `Spanish Mission' buildings (N= 161; 70.6%), compared to those with a high school education or trade certificate (N= 38; 51.4%). Whilst occupation and education have found to be key indicators of interest in heritage elsewhere (Prentice, 1993), care should be taken not to exaggerate the conclusions drawn here as a majority of respondents reported an interest in these styles irrespective of their level of education. While not as significant a variable as whether respondents had been on a guided tour, a higher proportion of respondents who had been on a self-guided walk around Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings indicated being very interested or interested in `Art Deco buildings' (N= 111; 89.5%), compared to those who had not been on a self-guided walk (N= 157; 78.5%). However, unlike the guided tour, no significant relationships were found between participation in a self-guided walk around Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings, and level of interest in `Spanish Mission', and `commercial buildings'. As such, it could be argued that in general, international tourists that participate in a guided tour of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings have a higher level of interest in the buildings, than casual viewers of the buildings. There was also found to be a significant relationship between respondents' nationality and their level of interest in `commercial buildings' (chi-square = 13.787; significant at .003; Cramer's V = .221). Specifically, a higher proportion of Australians indicated being very interested or interested in `commercial buildings' (N= 30; 75.0%), compared with respondents from the United Kingdom (N= 75; 67.6%), Europe (N= 57; 64.8%) and North America (N= 17; 39.5%). This finding supports the earlier findings that Australians in general appear to be relatively more interested in certain visual aspects of heritage buildings than other nationalities. Interestingly, there were no significant differences in the reported levels of interest in styles of heritage buildings and respondents' memberships to cultural groups, type of

104

accommodation used in Hawke's Bay, whether respondents had been on a self-guided drive, size of group and travel style. Furthermore, no significant differences were found between the number of nights spent in the region, and whether respondents had visited Hawke's Bay before. As such, visitors to the region appear to hold an interest in these styles of heritage buildings irrespective of these variables. 6.6: Words Used to Describe Hawke's Bay's Heritage Buildings. It has been determined that respondents were interested in a wide range of heritage building attributes and styles. However, to determine a representative view on the most striking attributes of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings, questionnaire respondents were asked unprompted, "What three words would you use to describe Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings?" Analysis of the 354 questionnaires revealed that the five most common descriptions of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings listed by respondents were `interesting' (N= 54; 15.3%), `colourful' (N= 41; 11.6%), `unique' (N= 34; 9.6%), well maintained/well preserved (N= 32; 9.0%), and `beautiful' (N= 27; 7.6%). Other common adjectives listed by respondents included `magnificent', `lovely', `striking', `nostalgic' and `classic'. A small minority of the 354 questionnaire respondents (9; 2.5%) wrote that they felt the heritage buildings were not well preserved using descriptions such as `heritage being lost', `not well preserved', `too many shop advertisements' and `tacky'. However, these comments did not arise during analysis of the interviews (Chapter Five), and it should be noted that only a very small minority of respondents made any negative comments regarding Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings. As similarly evidenced in the interview analysis, it appears from the listed positive descriptions provided by questionnaire respondents that the visual elements of Hawke's Bay heritage buildings, such as the architecture, colour, uniqueness, beauty and preserved fabric of the buildings, formed a particularly pronounced part of respondents' experiences of the buildings. The most commonly listed adjective, `interesting', potentially suggests that the educational aspect of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings was also prominent for a significant proportion of respondents. However, this interest could also be associated

105

with their visual appearance, or nostalgic value as discussed previously. That heritage settings must hold personal interest for the visitor is a conclusion reported elsewhere (for example, Moscardo; 1996, Beeho & Prentice, 1997). 6.7: Experiences Gained by International Tourists from Hawke's Bay's Heritage Buildings. It can be argued that the visual appeal of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings was indeed the prominent experience gained by most respondents. When respondents were asked to indicate their opinion as to `whether Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings were pleasant to look at', the overwhelming majority of questionnaire respondents either strongly agreed or agreed (N= 285; 93.4%) with this statement (see Table 6.5). Added to this, a substantial proportion of respondents indicated that they either strongly agreed or agreed (N= 272; 89.4%) that `Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings created a unique townscape'. Thus, the visual appeal of heritage buildings is important to tourists' experiences of a region. This is supported by Urry's (1992) notion of the tourist gaze. A large majority of respondents strongly agreed or agreed that `Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings' helped me learn about the region's history' (N= 257; 84.3%), `that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings contained a number of interesting stories' (229; 75.8%), and that they were able to `learn more about New Zealand through Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings' (N=203; 66.5%). The experiences that were indicated by a lesser proportion of respondents were `Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings allowed me to reflect on a time when the world wasn't so complicated' (N= 98; 32.6% strongly agreed or agreed), and `Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings allowed me to reflect on my past' (N = 67; 22.2% strongly agreed or agreed). However, these results still confirm that heritage buildings contribute to experiences of nostalgia and personal reflection for a significant proportion of international visitors to the region.

106

Table 6.5: Experiences Gained by Respondents' from Hawke's Bay's Heritage Buildings.
Experience Gained Strongly Agree N Were pleasant to look At Created a unique townscape Helped me learn about the region's history Contained a number of interesting stories Gained a New Zealand unique experience Helped me learn about New Zealand's history Gained a world unique experience Helped me learn about New Zealand's culture Have a good number of associated activities Allowed me to reflect on a time when the world wasn't so complicated Allowed me to reflect on my past % Agree N % Neither Agree Disagree N % or Disagree N % Strongly Disagree N % Not Given Mean Std. Dev.

130 (42.6) 136 (44.7) 69 (22.7)

155 (50.8) 136 (44.7) 188 (61.6)

18 29 43

(5.9) (9.5) (14.1)

1

(0.3)

0 (0.0) 0 (0.0) 0 (0.0)

49 50 49

1.41 1.42 1.67

0.800 0.853 0.901

20 (6.6) 4 (1.3)

69 (22.7)

160 (53.1)

70

(23.1)

3

(0.9)

0 (0.0)

51

1.73

0.967

64 (21.1)

125 (41.3)

88

(29.0)

20 (6.6)

5 (1.7)

51

1.93

1.167

37 (12.1)

166 (54.4)

86

(28.2)

14 (4.6)

0 (0.0)

50

1.93

1.036

65 (21.4)

105 (34.5)

81

(26.6)

44 (12.6)

8

(2.6)

50

2.08

1.247

26

(8.1)

133 (43.6)

124 (40.7)

18 (5.9)

2

(0.7)

50

2.11

1.112

26

(8.7)

98 (32.7)

158 (52.7)

14 (4.7)

3

(1.0)

54

2.17

1.159

25

(8.3)

73 (24.3)

125 (41.7)

47 (15.4)

29 (9.7)

54

2.49

1.440

17

(5.6)

50 (16.6)

146 (48.5)

59 (19.6)

28 (9.3)

53

2.64

1.430

107

6.8: Influences on the Nature of Experiences Gained from Hawke's Bay's Heritage Buildings. Analysis of the cross tabulations showed that the experiences of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings gained by respondents were not influenced by respondents' demographic characteristics. Specifically, the nature of their experiences were similar irrespective of their gender, age or level of education. Furthermore, there was found to be no influence by respondents' membership of a cultural or heritage group, number of nights spent in Hawke's Bay or whether they had previously visited Hawke's Bay. Whilst different demographic types of visitor experienced Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings in a similar way, not surprisingly, there were found to be notable differences among respondents who had been on a guided tour around Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings (see table 6.6). Indeed, significant relationships existed between whether respondents had been on a guided tour and respondents' levels of agreement to `the heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay... were pleasant to look at' (chi-square = 4.081; significant at .043; Cramer's V = .131), `created a unique townscape' (chi-square = 11.938; significant at .003; Cramer's V = .199), `contained a number of interesting stories' (chi-square = 20.387; significant at .000; Cramer's V = .269), `helped me learn about New Zealand's history' (chi-square = 4.321; significant at .038; Cramer's V = .126), `gained a world unique experience' (chi-square = 13.264; significant at .004; Cramer's V = .205), `have a good number of activities associated with them' (chi-square = 11.785; significant at .001; Cramer's V = .206), and `allowed me to reflect on my past' (chi-square = 9.061; significant at .003; Cramer's V = .183). Within these relationships, when compared to those respondents who had not been on a guided tour, it was found that respondents who had been on a guided tour were more likely to have reported that `Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings were pleasant to look at' (N = 84; 98.8% strongly agreed or agreed, compared to N= 200; 91.7%), that `Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings created a unique townscape' (N= 55; 76.4% strongly agreed or agreed, compared to N = 37; 32.5%), and `contain a number of interesting stories' (N= 80; 94.1% strongly agreed or agreed, compared to N= 148; 68.5%).

108

Table 6.6: Factors Influencing the Nature of Experiences Gained through Hawke's Bay's Heritage Buildings.
Experience Gained Gender Age Ed Qual Culture Group Nights spent in Hawke's Bay Visited Hawke's Bay before Been on guided tour Been on self guided walk Self Guided Drive Nation Grp Main Travel Style Size Accom

Were pleasant to look at Created a unique townscape Helped me learn about the region's history Contained a number of interesting stories Gained a New Zealand unique experience Helped me learn about New Zealand's history Gained a world unique experience Helped me learn about New Zealand's culture Have a good number of associated activities Allowed me to reflect on a time when the world wasn't so complicated Allowed me to reflect on my past

_

_

_

_

_

_

4.081 .043 .131+ 11.938 .003 .199+ 12.180 .000 .211+ 20.387 .000 .269+ _

_

_

_

_

_

5.845 .036 .139+ _ _

_ _

_ _

_ _

_ _

_ _

_ _

_ 6.545 .011 .156+ _

_ _

_ _

_ _

_ _

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

4.321 .038 .126+ 13.262 .004 .205+ _

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

11.785 .001 .206+

_

_

14.759 .005 .222+

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

_

9.061 .003 .183+

_

_

_

_

_

_

Note: The figures shown in the table above denote: Two Sample Chi-square value (only shown when these are <0.05) Significance level Cramer's V coefficient / direction of effect (+ positive; - negative; * not discernable)

109

It was also found that more respondents who had been on a guided tour indicated that they strongly agreed or agreed that `Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings helped them learn about New Zealand's culture' (N= 65; 76.4%), compared with respondents who had not been on a guided tour (N= 137; 63.1%). Respondents who had been on a guided tour were also more likely to strongly agree or agree with the statement `Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings gave me a unique experience I cannot get anywhere else in the world' (N= 60; 70.6%), compared to respondents who had not been on a guided tour (N= 109; 50.2%). Not surprisingly, respondents who had been on a guided tour were also more likely to strongly agree or agree that `Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings have a good number of activities associated with them' (N= 48; 57.1%), compared to respondents who had not been on a guided tour (N= 74; 34.6%). Partaking in a guided tour was also seen to significantly effect the proportion of respondents that were able to reflect on their past. Indeed, a higher proportion of respondents that had been on a guided tour indicated they strongly agreed or agreed that `Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings allowed me to reflect upon my past' (N= 29; 34.1%), compared to respondents that had not been on a guided tour (N= 37; 17.3%). Thus, it appears that guided tours significantly add to the experiential value of regions by more fully engaging visitors with the setting. In this way, guided tours have a potentially significant role in increasing the added value of heritage buildings to tourism within a region. Furthermore, respondents who had conducted a self-guided walk were more likely to indicate that the `heritage buildings helped me learn about Hawke's Bay's history' (chisquare = 6.545; significant at .011; Cramer's V = .156). Specifically, a higher proportion of respondents who had been on a self-guided walk reported that they strongly agreed or agreed that `Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings helped me learn about the region's history' (N= 112; 91.1%), compared to respondents who had not been on self-guided walk (N= 143; 79.4%). Whilst potentially not adding as much experiential value to international tourists' experiences of a region, compared to guided tours, self-guided walks appear to add some educational value. This could be enhanced through further product development and interpretation.

110

There was also found to be a significant relationship between nationality and `the activities associated with Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings' (chi-square= 14.759; significant at .005; Cramer's V= .222), Specifically, a higher proportion of Australians strongly agreed or agreed that `Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings have a good number of activities associated with them' (N= 19; 48.7%), compared to respondents from the United Kingdom (N= 51; 46.8%), Europe (N= 28; 32.9%) and North America (N= 11; 28.9%). This may be due to the relatively higher interest shown by Australians generally for heritage buildings and their associated activities, as discussed above. Furthermore, there was a significant relationship between travel style and `pleasant visuals' (chi-square= 5.845; significant at .036; Cramer's V= .139). Specifically, those respondents who were travelling free and independently were slightly more likely to strongly agree or agree that `Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings are pleasant to look at' (N= 241; 95.3%), compared to those that were on a semi-packaged or full-packaged tour (N= 44; 86.3%). These results are perhaps not surprising, as those travelling independently would presumably have greater opportunities to freely gaze upon Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings. 6.9: Chapter Conclusion. Identification of the ranking of attributes of heritage buildings that visitors have most interest in, and the most prominent experiences gained by visitors, is important for product development and promotion of heritage buildings within a region. Confirming conclusions drawn from the qualitative research, this chapter has further shown that respondents indicated being interested in more than just the visual attributes of heritage buildings. While the results indeed suggest that it was the visual attributes of heritage buildings that most respondents were interested in, the findings also suggest that respondents indicated being interested in a wide range of heritage building attributes, including their history and the stories associated with them; potentially those attributes that engage visitors experientially.

111

There is also some evidence to suggest that certain market segments are more interested in heritage buildings. Indeed, results provide some evidence to suggest that females, those aged over 50 years, Australians and those holding at least a tertiary qualification tend to be slightly more interested in certain attributes of heritage buildings. For example, results suggest that those aged over 50 years are more interested in the architecture, associated history, exteriors and interiors of heritage buildings, compared to those aged under 50 years. However, the nature of experiences gained from Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings were similarly gained by the majority of all demographic groups, and as such, future research into market segmentation is required to validate the conclusions drawn here. Perhaps most notable of the findings is the impact going on a guided-tour had on influencing the nature of experiences gained and level of interest shown by respondents. It has been shown that respondents were significantly more likely to gain experiences of interest to them from participation in a guided-tour. Thus, the role of the tour-guide to facilitate tourism experiences is prominent, especially in interpreting the story of the region and its heritage buildings. Thus, it can be concluded from the key findings in chapters five and six that tourists prefer to engage experientially with their heritage settings; that experiencing and learning the unique stories of a region rather than just merely gazing on the visual appeal of heritage buildings is important. For some visitor segments, the experiences and interest may lie in personal reflection, interest, or the nostalgic connection with heritage buildings. Findings of the questionnaire analysis thus validate the conclusions of McIntosh & Prentice (1999), among others, who advocate the importance of experiential dimensions to tourism, and of consumer-oriented marketing and product development. This finding, whilst requiring further validation, appears to hold true for the majority of tourists visiting townscapes as well as constructed heritage attraction settings.

112

Chapter 7: The Importance of Heritage Buildings for International Tourism to Hawke's Bay.

7.1: Introduction. It has been established that respondents gained a wide variety of experiences through Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings. Thus, it can be determined that heritage buildings are of significant importance to the region for international tourism as reported by tourists visiting the region. This chapter will further discuss the importance of heritage buildings for international tourism. In particular, this chapter will analyse the results of the contingent valuation questions used in this study's questionnaire, in order to provide economic data pertinent to the importance international tourists' place on Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings, and in terms of enhancing their experiences of the region. 7.2: The Importance of Hawke's Bay's Heritage Buildings to International Tourists. Findings of the analysis of 354 questionnaires showed that a significant proportion of respondents were drawn to visit Hawke's Bay because of the presence of heritage buildings in the region (see Table 7.1). Indeed, a significant proportion (N= 169; 50.7%) of respondents indicated that the region's heritage buildings had a very strong or strong `influence in motivating me to visit the region'. Only a small proportion (N= 50; 15.0%) of respondents indicated that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings had no influence on drawing them to the region. Tourists' experiences of heritage buildings were also a major attraction in the region. Table 7.2 indicates that the overwhelming majority of respondents (N= 279; 85.9%) either strongly agreed or agreed that `the presence of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings had added to their overall experience of the region'. Visiting Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings was indeed a popular activity amongst international tourists, with a significant proportion of respondents (N= 176; 50.3%) indicating that they had visited at least one heritage building prior to completing the questionnaire. The average length of time respondents had spent in Hawke's Bay prior to completing the questionnaire was 2.55 nights. Out of the nine listed activities in Hawke's

113

Bay contained in the questionnaire, the only activities that a higher proportion of respondents had visited/participated in during their stay in the region was shopping and visiting the beach (see Table 7.3). Table 7.1: The Influence of Heritage Buildings in Drawing Respondents to Hawke's Bay.
Very Strong Influence `How much of an influence did the presence of heritage buildings in the region have on bringing you to the region?' Strong Influence Moderate Influence Weak Influence No Influence Not Given Mean Std Dev

N

%

N

%

N

%

N

%

N

%

N 21

2.48

1.452

86 (25.8)

83 (24.9)

83 (24.9)

31 (9.3)

50 (15.0)

Table 7.2: Questionnaire Respondents' Indications to the Statement: `The Heritage Buildings in Hawke's Bay Added to my Experience of the Region'.
Strongly Agree `The heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay added to my experience of the region' Agree Neither Agree or Disagree Disagree Strongly Disagree Not Given Mean Std Dev

N

%

N

%

N

%

N % 3 (0.9)

N

%

28

1.69

0.834

103 (31.7)

176 (54.2)

42 (12.9)

1 (0.3)

114

Table 7.3: The Types of Activities Participated in/Visited by Questionnaire Respondents.
Type of Activity Yes No Not Given

N

%

N

%

Shopping Beach Heritage Buildings Arts and Crafts Specific Attraction Vineyards Heritage Trail Cinema Other Fishing

195 184 176 98 86 78 68 49 39 16

(55.7) (52.6) (50.3) (28.0) (24.6) (22.3) (19.4) (14.0) (11.2) (4.6)

155 166 174 252 263 272 282 301 310 334

(44.3) (47.4) (49.7) (72.0) (75.4) (77.7) (80.6) (86.0) (88.8) (95.4)

3 3 3 3 4 3 3 3 4 4

7.3: Factors Influencing the Importance of Hawke's Bay's Heritage Buildings to International Tourists. In order to determine any differences in terms of the importance of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings among respondents, cross-tabulations were calculated to determine any significant differences between a range of demographic and other variables (see Table 7.4). There were no significant differences between visitor types and demographics, the influence of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings on drawing them to the region, and the extent to which the region's heritage buildings added to respondents' experiences of the region. However, one notable difference was found among those respondents who had been on a guided tour and the `level of influence the heritage buildings had in drawing them to the region' (chi-square = 14.07; significant at .000; Cramer's V = .206). Specifically, of the 90 respondents who had been on a guided tour of the heritage buildings, 61 (67.8%) indicated that they had been very strongly influenced or strongly influenced to come to the region because of its heritage buildings. This finding is not

115

surprising given the findings revealed in chapter six; that those respondents who went on a guided tour generally reported a higher level of interest in the region's heritage buildings. Table 7.4: Factors Determining The Perceived Importance of Hawke's Bay's Heritage Buildings.
Gender Age Ed qual Cultural Group Nights spent in Hawke's Bay Visited Hawke's Bay before Been on guided tour Been on self guided walk Self Drive Nation Grp Main Travel Size Accom Style

Level of influence of heritage buildings in drawing respondents to the region The extent to which heritage buildings added to respondents' experiences of the region.

_

_

_

_

_

_

14.070 .000 .206+

19.384 .000 .247+

12.111 .001 .201+

_

_

_

9.827 .002 .182+

4.601 .032 .128+

16.037 .000 .226+ _ _ _ _ _

_

_

_

_

_

_

Note: The figures shown in the table above denote: Two Sample Chi-square value (only shown when these are <0.05)
Significance level Cramer's V coefficient / direction of effect (+ positive; - negative; * not discernable)

There was also found to be a significant relationship between whether respondents had been on a guided tour and `the extent to which heritage buildings added to respondents' experiences of Hawke's Bay' (chi-square = 4.601; significant at .032; Cramer's V = .128). Of the 88 respondents who had been on a guided tour, 82 (93.2%) indicated they strongly agreed or agreed that `Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings had added to their experience of the region', compared to 196 (83.1%) respondents that had not been on a guided tour. However, a majority of respondents indicated that heritage buildings had added to their experiences of the region irrespective of whether or not they had undertaken a guided tour.

116

Similarly, a significant relationship existed between whether respondents had been on a self-guided walk of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings and `the extent to which they were influenced to come to the region because of its heritage buildings' (chi-square = 19.834; significant at .000; Cramer's V = .247). Indeed, a higher proportion of respondents that had been on a self-guided tour indicated that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings had very strongly influenced or strongly influenced `their decision to come to the region' (N= 85; 66.4%), compared to respondents who did not complete a self-guided tour of the region's buildings (N= 84; 41.0%). Furthermore, a significant relationship was found between whether respondents had been on a self-guided walk, and `the extent to which Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings added to their experience of the region' (chi-square = 16.037; significant at .000; Cramer's V = .226). Specifically, a higher proportion of respondents that had been on a self-guided walk of the region's heritage buildings indicated they strongly agreed or agreed that `Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings added to my experience of the region' (N= 120; 96.0%), compared to respondents who had not been on a selfguided walk (N= 158; 79.4%). A significant relationship was also found between whether respondents had been on a self-guided drive, and `the extent to which they were influenced to come to the region because of its heritage buildings' (chi-square = 12.111; significant at .001; Cramer's V = .201). Not surprisingly, a higher proportion of respondents that had been on a self-guided drive indicated being very strongly or strongly `influenced to come to the region because of its heritage buildings' (28; 80.0%), compared to those who had not been on a selfguided drive (141; 47.3%). Interestingly, there was also found to be a significant relationship between respondents' travel styles and `the extent to which they were influenced to come to the region because of its heritage buildings' (chi-square= 9.827; significant at .002; Cramer's V= .182). Specifically, a higher proportion of respondents travelling free and independently throughout New Zealand indicated being very strongly or strongly `influenced to come to the region because of its heritage buildings' (N= 149; 55.2%), compared to those that were travelling by either a fully-packaged or semi-packaged tour. (N= 17; 30.9%). This is

117

perhaps not surprising, as respondents' travelling free and independently would be likely to have more choice as to which regions they would visit than those travelling by tour. 7.4: The Importance of Housing Shops, Restaurants, Accommodation and other Tourism Experiences in Heritage Buildings. Only a small number of questionnaire respondents either stayed in heritage accommodation while in Hawke's Bay (N= 30; 8.9%), or had eaten in a heritage restaurant (N= 25; 7.4%, see Table 7.5). To further determine the importance placed on heritage buildings by international tourists, questionnaire respondents were asked to indicate their views on whether they preferred to stay in, eat in, or shop in heritage buildings. As can be evidenced from Table 7.6, the majority of respondents neither agreed nor disagreed with the statements `I prefer to stay in/eat in/shop in heritage buildings'. However, a slightly higher proportion of respondents strongly agreed or agreed that they preferred to eat in heritage restaurants (N= 113; 34.1%), shop in heritage stores (N= 104; 31.6%), or stay in heritage accommodation (N= 81; 24.8%), compared to those who disagreed or strongly disagreed (see Table 7.6). This finding was not found to differ among different types of visitors. It is likely that for some tourists that indicated a preference to eat, shop, or stay in heritage accommodation, the main attraction of this would be the `novelty' of the experience. For those that preferred not to shop, eat, or stay in heritage buildings, it is likely that for some, this was due to the perception that these establishments may be lacking some modern comforts (McIntosh & Siggs, 2005), although this was not determined in the present study.

118

Table 7.5: Number of Respondents that Stayed in Heritage Accommodation and Ate in Heritage Restaurants in Hawke's Bay.
Type of Activity Stayed at Heritage Accommodation Ate in a Heritage Restaurant Yes N % No N % Not Given

30 25

(8.9)
(7.4)

307 311

(91.1) (92.6)

17 18

Table 7.6: Respondents' Preferences to Stay in/Eat in/Shop in Heritage Buildings.
Strongly Agree `I prefer to eat at restaurants based in heritage buildings' `I prefer to shop in stores operating in heritage buildings' `I prefer to choose accommodation in heritage buildings' Agree Neither Agree nor Disagree Disagree Strongly Disagree Not Given Mean Std Dev

N 18

%

N

%

N

%

N

%

N

% 21 2.76

1.475

(5.4) 95 (28.7) 172 (52.0)

42 (12.7) 6 (1.8)

18

(5.5) 86 (26.1) 175 (53.1)

46 (13.9) 5 (1.5)

24

2.80

.464

14

(4.3) 67 (20.5) 184 (56.3)

56 (17.1) 6 (1.8)

27

2.92

.434

While there were found to be only small proportions of respondents indicating that they had stayed at heritage accommodation, or eaten in a heritage restaurant while in Hawke's Bay, generally there were found to be little variation to this among different types of respondents. However, four exceptions were noted, although these relationships were found to be weak (as evidenced by their low Cramer's V value; see Table 7.7), and thus the significance of these findings should not be exaggerated.

119

Table 7.7: Influences on the Proportion of Respondents that Stayed at Heritage Accommodation and Ate in Heritage Restaurants in Hawke's Bay.
Type of Activity Gender Ed Age Qual Cultural Group Nights spent in Hawke's Bay Stayed at Heritage Accommodation Ate in a Heritage Restaurant _ _ _ _ Visited Hawke's Bay Before _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Guided Self Tour Walk Self Nation Grp Size Main Accom Travel Style

Guided Drive

4.143 .042 .129+
_

_

12.183 .016 .204+ _

_

_

_

_

_

6.364 .012 .149+

7.029 .008 .163+

_

_

_

Note: The figures shown in the table above denote: Two Sample Chi-square value (only shown when these are <0.05)
Significance level Cramer's V coefficient / direction of effect (+ positive; - negative; * not discernable)

Firstly, there was found to be a significant relationship between respondents' level of education and the proportion of respondents who had `stayed in heritage accommodation' (chi-square = 4.143; significant at .042; Cramer's V = .129). Indeed, a higher proportion of respondents holding a tertiary degree (partially completed or completed) or post-graduate qualification indicated they had `stayed in heritage accommodation in Hawke's Bay' (N= 74; 26.5%), compared to respondents whose highest educational achievement was a secondary school education or trade certificate (N= 2; 7.1%). This finding may be because those respondents with higher education levels prefer heritage experiences, as they are more frequent visitors to heritage attractions (Prentice, 1993b). Secondly, a significant relationship existed between whether respondents had been on a self-guided walk, and whether they had `eaten in a heritage restaurant' (chi-square = 6.364; significant at .012; Cramer's V= .149). It was found that a higher proportion of respondents who had been on a self-guided walk had `eaten in a heritage restaurant' (N= 16; 64.0%), compared to those who had not been on a self-guided walk (N= 113; 36.3%). This finding may be because those respondents who self-guided themselves around Hawke's Bay were more likely to pass a heritage restaurant on their walk, and wished to have a break from their walk by taking time to eat

120

at a heritage restaurant. Thirdly, there was a significant relationship between whether respondents had taken a self-guided drive and `eaten in a heritage restaurant' (chisquare= 7.029; significant at .008; Cramer's V= .163). Specifically, more respondents who had been on a self-guided drive had `eaten in a heritage restaurant' (N= 7; 20.0%), compared to those who had not been on a self-guided drive (N= 18; 6.0%). The likely reason for this is that respondents self-driving themselves around the region were more likely to spot a heritage restaurant on their drive, than those who had not. Fourthly, there was also found to be a significant relationship between accommodation type and `staying in heritage accommodation' (chi-square= 12.183; significant at .016; Cramer's V= .204). Specifically, a higher proportion of respondents whose main form of accommodation while in Hawke's Bay was hotels, indicated they had `stayed in heritage accommodation' (N= 11; 16.9%), compared to those who stayed in backpackers (N= 6; 7.3%), motels (N= 4; 6.9%) and in campervans/campsites (N= 1; 1.9%). This finding suggests that more hotels in Hawke's Bay are situated in heritage buildings, compared to other forms of commercial accommodation. 7.5: Contingent Valuation Results. Using contingent valuation, the questionnaire sought to determine how much in monetary amounts, the experiences gained from Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings were valued by respondents. Drawing on established Contingent Valuation theory, respondents were asked to `imagine that you had already booked accommodation to stay in Hawke's Bay for a holiday, but had found that all the heritage buildings in the region were due to be completely modernised'. They were then asked if they would be willing to pay any money to ensure that the buildings were preserved for their holiday. Respondents were then asked whether they would be willing to pay a selected random amount to ensure the heritage buildings were preserved for their holiday. A majority of respondents (N= 173; 55.9%) indicated that they would be `willing to pay some money' to ensure that the heritage buildings were preserved for their holiday, while, notably, a higher proportion of respondents (N= 194; 63.4%) indicated that they would be willing to pay the random amount included in the questionnaire (refer to Table 7.8). The minimum and maximum

121

amounts included in the questionnaire were $1 and $50 respectively, and increased by $1 intervals. A higher proportion of questionnaires contained amounts between $1 and $20 in order to ensure a sufficient sample size at these amounts so that conclusions could be drawn. Table 7.8: Willingness of Respondents to Pay To Preserve Hawke's Bay's Heritage Buildings. Willingness of Respondents to Pay Some Amount Amount in Questionnaire Of course, one cannot guarantee that all respondents who said they would be willing to pay the random amount would in fact pay if required to. With any contingent valuation study, figures are likely to be slightly inflated, as some people wish to provide `socially acceptable' answers (Navrud & Ready, 2002). However, these results, nevertheless, suggest that many respondents might be willing to make a personal trade-off; that is, to spend some money in order to gain the experiences Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings provide. Indeed, the finding that tourists would theoretically be willing to pay money to ensure the preservation of heritage for them to experience has been illustrated a number of times before (for example, Powe & Willis, 1996; Navrud & Ready, 2002; Salazar & Marquez, 2005). Notable from the findings of the cross tabulation was that despite significant differences being evident between different types of visitors and their interests and experiences of heritage buildings, there were found to be few differences between tourists and their willingness to pay for the preservation of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings (see Table 7.9). Significant relationships existed between whether respondents went on a self-guided N 173 194 % 55.9 63.4 N 137 112 % 44.1 36.6 43 47 Yes No Not Answered

122

drive and their `willingness to pay some amount of money' (chi-square= 6.686; significant at .010; Cramer's V= .158), group size and respondents' `willingness to pay the amount included in the questionnaire' (chi-square= 4.007; significant at .045; Cramer's V= .125), and respondents' main accommodation type in Hawke's Bay and their `willingness to pay the amount included in the questionnaire' (chi-square= 10.650; significant at .031; Cramer's V= 1.98). Table 7.9: Influences on International Tourists' Willingness to Pay.
Willingness of respondents to pay Some Amount Amount in questionnaire
Gender Age Ed Qual Cultural Nights Group spent in Hawke's Bay Visited Hawke's Bay Before Guided Tour Self Guided Walk Self Drive Nation Grp Size Main Accom Travel Style

_ _

_ _

_ _

_ _

_ _

_ _

_ _

_ _

6.686 .010 .158+

_ _

_
4.007 .045 .125+

_
10.650 .031 .198+

_ _

_

Specifically, a higher proportion of respondents who had been on a self-guided drive indicated that they would `pay some amount of money to ensure the preservation of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings for their holiday' (N= 26; 78.8%), compared to those who had not been on a self-guided drive (N= 147; 53.5%). This may be because some respondents who purchased or rented a car to travel around Hawke's Bay thought they would be able to benefit more from being able to view preserved heritage buildings, as they would provide interest to their drive. Interestingly, a higher proportion of respondents travelling in a group size of three or more indicated their `willingness to pay some amount of money' (N= 50; 75.8%), compared to those travelling alone or as a couple (N= 140; 61.4%). This may be because some respondents travelling in larger groups valued the social nature of their experiences more than those travelling alone or as a couple.

123

It was also found that a slightly higher proportion of respondents whose main form of accommodation while in Hawke's Bay was hotels indicated their `willingness to pay some amount of money' (N= 45; 73.8%), compared to those who stayed in motels (N= 35; 67.3%), campervans/campsites (N=31; 63.3%) and backpacker or youth hostel accommodation (N= 37; 48.1%). This again is perhaps not surprising, as generally hotels are more expensive than motels, campervans/campsites, and especially backpacker or youth hostels, and thus, respondents staying in hotels are likely to be potentially more affluent, or more willing/able to spend on leisure, than those staying in other forms of accommodation. Table 7.10 shows the proportion of respondents who would be willing to pay at certain dollar amounts on top of their accommodation bill per night, to ensure that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings would be preserved for them to enjoy experientially on their holiday. The majority of questionnaire respondents would be willing to spend an extra $1-5 (N= 91; 79.8%), $6-10 (N= 33; 62.3%) and $11-15 (N= 25; 56.8%) on top of the cost of their accommodation per night to ensure that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings were available for them to enjoy while they were in the region. It is worth noting that willingness to pay reduces as the amounts increase. However, the overall non-response rates for the contingent valuation study was high and response rates reduced significantly when the amounts contained within the questionnaire went above $20, suggesting that some respondents found the amount contained within the questionnaire to be too high, and thus avoided the question. However, the fact that willingness to pay amounts up to and exceeding $20 on the cost of accommodation is a notable finding for preservation bodies in the region. This present study used a cost on the top of accommodation to determine willingness to pay, although it should be mentioned that other approaches have been used in previous research. For instance, Powe & Willis (1996) used contingent valuation on top of the entry price to Warkworth Castle in Northumbria to determine willingness to pay, and Salazar & Marquez (2005) created a scenario whereby respondents were asked their willingness to pay a voluntary donation to a special trust fund that would work to

124

preserve the Arab Tower under question. Future contingent valuation research on Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings could be conducted on, for example, additional willingness to pay for guided tours or other heritage building activities. However, for the present study, it was felt that to achieve the largest and most representative sample, a cost on top of the accommodation would be a realistic scenario that most respondents could identify with. Furthermore, as discussed in Chapter Four, a contingent valuation study using a `voluntary' scenario is not ideal, and if possible should be avoided (Berrens et al, 2003). Table 7.10: Willingness of Respondents to Pay to Ensure Hawke's Bay's Heritage Buildings' Preservation for their Holiday. Amount $1-$5 $6-$10 $11-$15 $16-$20 $21-$25 $26-$30 $31-$35 $36-$40 $50 7.6: Chapter Conclusion. This chapter has determined that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings are indeed important for tourism in the region. A significant number of questionnaire respondents indicated that they had been influenced to come to the region because of its heritage buildings. Furthermore, the overwhelming majority of respondents indicated that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings added to their experience of the region. Despite this, this chapter Yes N 91 33 25 17 9 0 3 0 2 % (79.8) (62.3) (56.8) (40.5) (50.0) (0.0) (37.5) (0.0) (50.0) No N 23 20 19 25 9 9 5 3 2 (20.2) (37.7) (43.2) (59.5) (50.0) (100.0) (62.5) (100.0) (50.0) 114 53 44 42 18 9 8 3 4 Total

125

supports McIntosh and Siggs' (2005) findings that, for most respondents, the fact that a restaurant, shop, or place of accommodation was based in a heritage building may not be the defining motivator to choose those places ahead of other establishments. It was found that the majority of respondents would, theoretically, be willing to make a monetary trade-off to ensure that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings would be preserved for their time spent in Hawke's Bay. However, the high non-response rate, and likelihood of `warm glow' answers; that is, agreeing to pay the amount in theory but not in reality, means that these results must be treated with caution. Furthermore, contingent valuation results should never by themselves form the basis of preservation decisions (Salazar & Marquez, 2005). Future contingent valuation research would strengthen the legitimacy of these findings, and there is room to extend the monetary amounts asked of respondents in order to determine the point at which no respondents are prepared to pay the asking amount. However, that heritage buildings are indicated by the majority of respondents as having importance to their decision to visit the region, to their experience of the region generally, and that they would likely be willing to pay extra for the preservation of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings is a significant finding that strengthens the case for the preservation and interpretation of heritage buildings in the region for tourism purposes. Whilst further research is required to validate this conclusion, the fact that the relative importance of heritage buildings to tourism in regions has not previously been reported in tourism research renders the findings reported here of noteworthy attention.

126

Chapter Eight: Conclusion. This thesis has sought to address the lack of attention given in the tourism literature to the relationship between heritage buildings and tourism. This thesis therefore sought to explore the influence of heritage buildings in shaping international tourists' experiences of Hawke's Bay, gain insight into the specific attributes of heritage buildings that influenced the experiences of international tourists visiting the region, and examine the relative importance of heritage buildings for international tourism to Hawke's Bay, as perceived by international tourists visiting the region. Attention to the experiences gained by international tourists from heritage buildings, and the relative importance they place on them is important for meeting key priorities identified by The New Zealand Tourism Strategy 2010 (Chapter One), and for future product development and preservation (Chapter Three). Furthermore, Prince (1961) argues, "a knowledge of places is an indispensable link in the chain of knowledge" (p.22). As advocated in previous studies of tourism experiences, a mixed-methodology approach was adopted (Denzin, 1978; Otto & Ritchie, 1996; Prentice et al, 1998; McIntosh & Prentice, 1999). Specifically, this thesis combined semi-structured interviews, a questionnaire, and photograph-supported interviews. The questionnaire was utilised to support the qualitative methods, which are still treated by scepticism by some (Walle, 1997), and the qualitative methods were utilised in order to elicit rich narratives of the experiential aspects and relative importance of heritage buildings, as assumed in the personal constructions of individual consumers (Beeho & Prentice, 1997; Prentice et al, 1998; McIntosh & Siggs, 2005). Findings of the 50 semi-structured interviews and 66 photograph-supported interviews conducted with international tourists in Hawke's Bay revealed three key themes of the heritage building experience, namely, `visual appeal', `personal reflections' and `engaging experiences'. This thesis posits the need to examine the holistic experiences of tourists in order to capture tourists' narratives from within a general townscape setting. As such, qualitative methods facilitating inductive analysis that ground the experiences in tourists own

127

realities are deemed important; so too are methods that further the elaboration and capture of respondents' `thick' descriptions, such as the use of photographs and probing techniques (e.g. laddering) in in-depth interviews. Future research might also consider different stages of tourists' experiences, such as in anticipation or memory (for example, Arnould & Price, 1993; Fluker & Turner, 2000). While this thesis elicited results that support the theory that there is an emphasis on the visual elements of tourists' experiences (Urry, 1990; see Chapters Five and Six), it argues that respondents engage with heritage buildings in a more holistic way. In particular, it was found that a built townscape is not a passive space. Heritage buildings render the townscape an experiential space filled with emotional, mindful, engaging and personally imbued significance. This finding adds weight to Scruton's (1979) argument that architecture allows respondents to use their imagination and to create a wide variety of experiences from this. In particular, it appeared that international tourists helped to create their own experiences by making the environment relevant to a context they were personally interested in. For example, respondents from a wide range of countries, including England, Australia, Wales, Ireland, Scotland, and U.S.A. used Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings as a trigger to recount personal memories that were pleasurable to reminisce upon, and of personal value to them (Chapter Five). Essentially then, a townscape consisting of heritage buildings can be conceptualised as being a cultural landscape; that is, it is perceived, contextualised, and experienced in a personal way that is of value to visitors (Rubenstein, 1989). In this way, tourists have their own attachment towards the townscape; they construct a place where they can reflect, grow, or go back to their roots. They can have a sense of belonging and feel comfortable with their place (Tuan, 2004). Indeed, places that people hold to be meaningful, such as Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings, are of significance to individuals, as they "give form and structure to our experiences of the world" (Norberg-Schulz, 1969, p.226). Thus, the experiences gained from heritage buildings are highly personalised, and as discussed in Chapter Five, the most memorable and valued experiences are deeply personal and meaningful (Timothy, 1997). The argument that visitors create their own perception of place also adds support to the argument that each place will be viewed from a variety of

128

perspectives (Wright, 1985; Urry, 1990; Fisher, 2000). Furthermore, it adds credence to Pearce's (1988) comment that tourists are increasingly concerning themselves with "not just being `there', but with participating, learning and experiencing the `there' they visit (p.219). These findings have important implications for destination promotion and management. This thesis argues that because heritage buildings allow visitors to imbue their feelings and thoughts onto their gained experiences, townscapes consisting of heritage buildings can differentiate themselves experientially, which is of significant importance in a global marketplace (Pine & Gilmore, 1995; Wilson, 2002; Richards & Wilson, Article in Press). Furthermore, these findings suggest that heritage buildings are not solely of importance to a national or regional history; they are resources that can become personally meaningful to any visitor through individual interpretation. Indeed, because Hawke's Bay has a significant concentration of particularly Art Deco buildings that are largely unique (Chapters Five and Six), the region has a significant point of differentiation. The finding that townscapes are more than passive spaces also has important ramifications for product development. Specifically, it presents potential opportunities to enhance the level of engagement visitors have with heritage buildings, through, for example, an increase in interior tours (Chapter Five). There is an argument by some that because some building interiors in Hawke's Bay are not completely true to their 1930's appearance, they may detract from the overall heritage building experience (Chapter Five). Indeed, Dovey (1985) asked, "at what time does heritage become inauthentic?" (Chapter Two). This present research agrees with Fitch (1995), that although a number of Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings' interiors have been altered from their original state, the fact that tourists are able to imbue their own personal thoughts and situations onto the heritage experience, combined with the finding that there is a notable demand for more interior tours (Chapter Five), means that most international tourists still feel Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings have maintained their `spirit'. This has implications for the promotion and preservation of heritage buildings, as although a number of buildings will

129

be altered for inevitable 21st century progress, if what is special about the building is maintained, it is still a valuable tourism resource. Furthermore, the findings that tour guides had such a prominent impact on the experience of international tourists illustrates the point that generally, the more engaged a visitor became with the heritage buildings, the more valued experiences they gained (Chapter Six). The strongest differences in experiences between those who had been on a guided tour compared to those who had not was respondents' opinions to the statements `the heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay helped me learn about the region's history', and `contained a number of interesting stories' (Chapter Six). This potentially suggests that while tour guides do act to `sacrilize the site' (Fine & Speer, 1985), the most influential role of heritage tour guides is potentially to enhance the level of interaction and engagement visitors have with the resource, through, for example, describing stories and pieces of history relevant to the resource from which visitors can derive their own significance and meaning. Indeed, the role of the tour guide, particularly of heritage resources is not institutionalised and is open to interpretation by guides and visitors alike (Holloway, 1981). This research provides some evidence to suggest that tour guides can have significant influences on the level of engagement visitors have with heritage buildings, and thus significantly enhance the nature of their experiences. It is also pertinent to note that even without guided tours or information allowing for selfguided walks, heritage buildings still add significant value to a region in a number of ways. Specifically, this thesis adds support to Urry's (1990) argument that buildings are of major importance in shaping the tourist gaze. Indeed, there is much debate as to the causes of "the contemporary fascination with gazing upon the historical or what is now known as heritage" (Urry, 1990 p.104). Perhaps the finding that heritage buildings are used to create personalised and meaningful experiences hints at the answer to this. Indeed, it was found that heritage buildings as part of the townscape significantly add to the overall visual appeal of a region (Chapter Five), and can significantly differentiate a region visually, and add to feelings of `space and peace' (Chapter Five). Thus, it is argued that with a world that is getting busier and more crowded, a destination has a

130

distinctive advantage if it can offer visitors resources which allow them to personally reflect upon their lives, and yearn for a past that was perceived to be favourable to the present. Furthermore, heritage buildings were found to support Urry's (1990) theory that against a distinctive visual backdrop the most mundane activities become more interesting (Chapter Five). For example, a number of people commented that it was nice simply to sit and look at the buildings, or stroll around the area (Chapter Five). With reference to New Zealand's `cultural cringe' (Chapter Three) and the negative word of mouth given by some locals regarding Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings add credence to Urry's (1990) argument that locals and visitors will see a place differently. Thus, there is a need for local residents to understand the value ascribed to the region's heritage buildings by international tourists. The importance of word of mouth recommendation for tourism experiences emphasises the influential role of the community. In addition to playing a role in promoting townscapes, communities also assist in the creation of tourists' experiences of townscapes (as evidenced by the role of the tour guide, and interaction with locals, as discussed in Chapter Five). As such, there is a need to help local residents attach the same shared sense of value for their built environment. The findings of this thesis are significant for preservation bodies concerned with heritage buildings. Particularly, this present research has determined that heritage buildings have a significant influence on drawing international tourists to a region, and shaping their experiences gained in the region; they tell the unique story of a region and engage visitors with their own meaningful stories (Chapters Five, Six and Seven). Furthermore, a significant proportion of international tourists valued their experiences and would be willing to pay to ensure the preservation of the buildings. The majority of respondents indicated that they would be willing to pay up to $20 on top of their accommodation cost per night to ensure that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings were preserved for their holiday (Chapter Seven). While the contingent valuation results presented in this thesis should be treated with caution, and should be substantiated with further research, they are further evidence to suggest that Hawke's Bay's heritage buildings are of significant

131

importance for tourism in the region. Thus, when making preservation decisions, the significant relationship between heritage buildings and tourism should not be overlooked. Furthermore, because it has been illustrated that heritage buildings can potentially enhance the experience of all tourists and locals, they can play a significant role in ensuring sustainable tourism development for a country, which in New Zealand's case is particularly important (Chapter Three). If heritage buildings are not preserved, not only will a country lose a valuable resource which has value to visitors and locals alike; it will lose a part of its history and what makes it unique. Indeed, while it is acknowledged that the overwhelming majority of New Zealander's value culture and heritage (Chapter Three), there is a need for further research to examine and compare how local residents, domestic as well as international tourists interpret, value and experience heritage buildings; places are likely viewed differently by different groups of people (Wright, 1985; Urry, 1990; Fisher, 2000). For example, Relph (1976) argues that locals will experience architecture differently to tourists because they sleep, eat and work in these buildings, and thus have a different concept of `place'. Ashworth and Tunbridge (1990) concur, adding that visitors who are `outsiders' to the region are likely to have a more limited knowledge of the townscape than locals, and will thus have different expectations. This again will result in a different interpretation of the townscapes, and thus will influence the nature of experiences gained from the townscape. A further pertinent issue is the question presented by Ashworth and Tunbridge (1990); "whose history or whose heritage is being presented?" (p.54). It is argued that a number of cities present the heritage they would like tourists to view; for example, large monuments concentrated in a small part of the city often draw the attention of a disproportionate number of visitors. However, this present research provides support for Ashworth and Tunbridge (1990), who argue that there appears to be increasing interest in smaller domestic buildings. In Hawke's Bay, there were no `outstanding' buildings (Chapter Five). Thus, a townscape consisting of a number of widespread heritage buildings can lead a visitor to experience a larger part of the city, and thus engage with local history. However, it must be acknowledged that Hawke's Bay places significant

132

emphasis on its 1920's and 1930's history, through its heritage buildings and activities associated with this. Therefore, it could be argued that other parts of the region's history are being slightly `hidden' behind this. However, the question of whose heritage is being presented will ultimately be determined by how visitors interpret what they are viewing (Ashworth and Tunbridge, 1990). This present study has addressed the gap exploring the relationship between heritage buildings and tourism, and has determined that heritage buildings are a valuable resource for tourism. Future research into the nature of experiences gained by visitors from townscapes, and the perceived importance of elements within the townscape to them, is warranted. There is a need to determine the interpretation, perceived importance and experiences gained by different visitor types from heritage buildings before buildings considered of popular heritage value are lost forever, and their stories remain untold through any tangible fabric. There is also a need for similar research to be undertaken in different case study areas, as to some extent, experiences are setting dependent (McIntosh, 1997), and for different building and architecture types. Having substantiated the significance of the relationship between heritage buildings and tourism in one case study region of New Zealand, this thesis posits the need for a more urgent research agenda to understand the important relationship between tourism and the built environment, and for a policy agenda that more closely aligns the heritage and tourism sectors.

133

References. Albers, P. C., & James, W.R. (1988). Travel photography: a methodological approach. Annals of Tourism Research, 15, (1) 134-158. Allsopp, B. (1974). Towards a humane architecture. London: Frederick Muller Limited. Alzua, A., O'Leary, J., & Morrison, A. (1998). Cultural and heritage tourism: Identifying niches for international travelers. The Journal of Travel and Tourism Studies, 9, (2) 2-13. Anonymous (2006). Agatha Christie. Retrieved 4 January, 2006 from www.members.aol.com. Arnould, E.J., & Price, L.L. (1993). River magic: extraordinary experience and the extended service encounter. The Journal of Consumer Research, 20, (1) 24-45. Art Deco Trust (2002a). The Art Deco Tourist. Retrieved 5 August 2005 from www.artdeconapier.com. Art Deco Trust (2002b). Brebner Print Art Deco Weekend Information Guide. Retrieved 5 August 2005 from www.artdeconapier.com. Art Deco Trust (2005). Art Deco Napier: New Zealand. Retrieved 5 August 2005 from www.artdeconapier.com. Arwel Edwards, J., & Llurds i Coit, C. (1996). Mines and quarries: industrial heritage tourism. Journal of Travel and Tourism Marketing, 23, (2) 341-363. Ashworth, G.J., & Tunbridge, J.E. (1990). The tourist-historic city. London: Belhaven

134

Press. Ateljevic, I., Harris, C., Wilson, E., & Collins, F. (2005). Getting "entangled:" reflexivity and the `critical turn' in tourism studies. Tourism Recreation Research, 30, (2) 9-21. Ayikoru, M. (2005). Enhancing the interpretive and critical approaches to tourism inquiry through discursive semiotic analysis. Embodying tourism research: advancing critical approaches. Dubrovnik, Canada: University of Wales Institute. Babbie, E. (1998). The practice of social research. London: Wadsworth Publishing Company. Balcar, M. J. O., & Pearce, D.G. (1996). Heritage tourism on the West Coast of New Zealand. Tourism Management, 17, (3) 203-212. Baloglu, S. (2001). Image variations of Turkey by familiarity index. Tourism Management, 22, (2) 127-133. Beeho, A.J., & Prentice, R.C. (1995). An application of ASEB Grid Analysis to Blists Hill Open-Air Museum, The Ironbridge Gorge Museum. Museum Management and Curatorship, 14, (3) 229-251. Beeho, A. J., & Prentice, R.C. (1997). Conceptualizing the experiences of heritage tourists: A case study of New Lanark World Heritage Village. Tourism Management 18, (2) 75-87. Berrens, R.P., Jenkins-Smith, H., Bohara, A.K., & Silva, C.L. (2002). Further investigation of voluntary contribution contingent: fair share, time of contributions, and respondent uncertainty. Journal of Environmental

135

Economics and Management, 44 144-168. Bharath, B.M., Josiam, M., Mattson, M., & Sullivan, P. (2004). The historaunt: heritage tourism of Mickey's Dining Car. Tourism Management, 25, (4), 453-461. Bigne, J. E., & Andreu, L. (2004). Emotions in segmentation: an empirical study. Annals of Tourism Research, 31, (3) 682-696. Bodger, D. (1998). Leisure, learning and travel. The Journal of Physical Education, Recreation and Dance, 69, (4) p. L2-(4). Borden, M. (November 28, 2004). Napier, Out of Ashes A Monument To Art Deco. New York Times. Retrieved September 18, 2005 from www.proquest.umi.com. Botterill, D. (2001). The epistemology of a set of tourism studies. Leisure Studies, 20, (3) 199-214. Botterill, T.D., & Crompton, J.L. (1996). Two case studies exploring the nature of Tourists' experience. Journal of Leisure Research, 28, (1) 57-82. Brecken, S. (2005). The role of tourist icons for sustainable tourism. Journal of Vacation Marketing, 11, (1) 21-30. Buhalis, D. (1998). Strategic use of information technologies in the tourism industry. Tourism Management, 19, (5) 409-421. Caffyn, A., & Lutz, J. (1999). Developing the heritage tourism product in multi-ethnic cities. Annals of Tourism Management, 20, (2) 213-221. Carney, T.F. (1972). Content analysis: A technique for systematic inference from

136

communications. London: B.T. Batsford. Carr, W., & Kemmis, S. (1986). Becoming critical: education knowledge and action research. London and New York: Routlege, Falmer, Taylor and Francis Group. Champ, P. A., Boyle, K.J., & Brown, T.C., (Eds). (2003). A Primer on Nonmarket Valuation. The economics of non-market goods and resources. Netherlands: Kluwer Academic. Chandler, J. A., & Costello, C.A. (2002). A profile of visitors at heritage tourism destinations in East Tennessee according to Plog's lifestyle and activity level preferences model. Journal of Travel Research, (41) 161-166. Chhabra, D., Healy, R., & Sills, E. (2003). Staged authenticity and heritage tourism. Annals of Tourism Research, 30, (3) 702-719. Chhetri, P., Arrowsmith, C., & Jackson, M. (2004). Determining hiking experiences in nature-based tourist destinations. Tourism Management, 25, (1) 31-43. CMP Information Limited. (2004, 15 October). New buildings shunned in favourites poll. Building Design, 1-7. Cohen, E. (1972). Toward a sociology of international tourism. Social Research, 3, (9) 164-182. Cole, S. T., & Scott, D. (2004). Examining the mediating role of experience quality in a model of tourist experiences. Journal of Travel and Tourism Marketing, 16, (1) 79-90.

137

Collier, A. (1999). Principles of Tourism. New Zealand: Addison Wesley Longman. Colmar Brunton Social Research Agency. (2003). Demand for Cultural Tourism: Summary of research findings. Retrieved 10 November, 2004, from www.creativenz.govt.nz. Corrigan, P. (1997). The sociology of consumption. London: Sage. Cossons, N. (1989). Heritage tourism? Trends and tribulations. Tourism Management, 10, (3) 192-194. De Cauter, L. (1995) Archeologie van de Kick. In G. Richards, & J. Wilson. (Article in Press). Developing creativity in tourist experiences. A solution to the serial reproduction of culture? Tourism Management. Denzin, N.K. (1978). Sociological methods: a sourcebook. New York: McGraw-Hill. Denzin, N.K., & Lincoln, Y.S. (2003). Collecting and interpreting qualitative materials. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage. Dovey, K. (1985). The quest for authenticity and the application of environmental meaning. In D. Seamon and R. Mugerauer. (Eds.). Dwelling, place and environment: towards a phenomenology of person and world. du Cros, H., Bauer, T., Lo, C., & Rui, S. (2005). Cultural heritage assets in China as sustainable tourism products: Case studies of the Hutongs and the Huanghua section of The Great Wall. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 13, (2) 171-194. Dutta, M., Banerjee, S., & Husain, Z. (2005). Untapped demand for heritage: A contingent valuation study of Prinsep Ghat, Calcutta. Tourism

138

Management (In Press, Corrected Proof). Erdley, M., & Kesterson-Townes, L. (2003). "Experience rules": a scenario for the hospitality and leisure industry circa 2010 envisions transformation. Strategy and Leadership, 31, (3) 12-18. Fairweather, J. R., & Swaffield, S.R. (2001). Visitor experiences of Kaikoura, New Zealand: an interpretative study using photographs of landscapes and Q method. Tourism Management, 22, (3) 219-228. Fairweather, J. R., & Swaffield, S.R. (2002). Visitors and locals experiences of Rotorua, New Zealand: an interpretative study using photographs of landscapes and Q method. International Journal of Tourism Research, (4) 283-297. Farrell, B., & Twining-Ward, L. (2005). Seven steps towards sustainability: tourism in the context of new knowledge. Journal of Sustainable Tourism. 13, (2) 109122. Fielding, N.G., & Fielding, J.L. (1986). Linking data. Beverly Hills: Sage. Fiftiesweb (2006). Classic TV shows - Miami Vice. Received 4 January 2005 from www.members.aol.com. Fine, E.C., & Speer, J. (1985). Tour guide performances as site sacrilization. Annals of Tourism Research, 12, (1) 73-95. Fink, A. (1995). How to sample in surveys. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications. Fisher, D. (2000). The socio-economic consequences of tourism in Levuka, Fiji.

139

Unpublished thesis, Lincoln University, New Zealand. Fisher, D. (5-7 December, 2002). Tourism, culture and development: Whose culture? Whose development? 3rd Biennial Conference of the International Development Studies Network of Aotearoa, New Zealand. Massey University. Fiskee, M., & Handel, L. (1947). Motion picture research: response analysis. Journal of Marketing, 11, (3) 273-280. Fitch, J.M. (1995). Historic Preservation: Curatorial management of the built world. Virginia: University Press of Virginia. Fluker, M.R., & Turner, L.W. (2000). Needs, motivations and expectations of a commercial whitewater rafting experience. Journal of Travel Research, 38, (4) 380-388. Frangialli, F. (2002). Speech by Francesco Frangialli, Secretary-General of the World Tourism Organization. Retrieved 14 September, 2005 from www.world-tourism.org. Frost, W. (2006). Braveheart-ed Ned Kelly: historic films, heritage tourism and destination image. Tourism Management, 27, (2) 245-254. Fyall, A., & Garrod, B. (1998). Heritage tourism: At what price? Managing Leisure, 3, (4) 213-228. Galani-Moutafi, V. (2000). The self and the other: traveler, ethnographer, tourist. Annals of Tourism Research, 27, (1), 203-224. Garlick, S. (2002). Revealing the unseen: tourism, art and photography. Cultural Studies, 16, (2) 289-305.

140

Garrod, B., & Fyall, A. (2000). Managing heritage tourism. Annals of Tourism Research, 27, (3) 682-708. Garrod, G.D., Willis, K.G., Bjarnadottir, H., & Cockbain, P. (1996). The nonpriced benefits of renovating historic buildings: A case study of Newcastle's Grainger Town. Cities, 13, (6) 423-430. Gergen, K. (1999). An invitation to social construction. Sage: London. Goodson, L., & Phillimore, J. (2004). The inquiry paradigm. In J. Phillimore & L. Goodson (Eds.), Qualitative research in tourism: ontologies, epistemologies and methodologies. London: Routledge. Gordon, A. (2004). Heritage and authenticity : the case of Ontario's Sainte-Marie-among-the-Hurons. Canadian Historical Review, 85, (3) 507-532. Goulding, C. (1999). Heritage, nostalgia and the `gray' consumer. Journal of Marketing Practice: Applied Marketing Science, 5, (6) 177-199. Graham, B. (2002). Heritage as knowledge: capital or culture? Urban Studies, 39, (5/6) 1003-1017. Grant, A. (1998). Appropriation of heritage creating meaning and identity: the ASB Bank in Napier. The 18th New Zealand Geographical Society, Hamilton. Grant, A. H. M. (1996). Part past part fiction: the revaluation of heritage buildings in the urban landscape. Hamilton: University of Waikato. Greenwood, D.J. (2004). Foreword. In D. Medina Lasanky & B. McLaren (Eds.).

141

Architecture and tourism. United Kingdom: Berg. Greffe, X. (2004). Is heritage an asset or a liability? Journal of Cultural Heritage, 5, (3) 301-309. Griffiths, M. (2000). Tourism and public buildings: the case for Parliament Houses as tourism attractions. Journal of Tourism Studies, 11, (2) 53-60. Groves, D.L., & Timothy, D.J. (2001). Photographic techniques and the measurement of impact and importance attributes on trip design: a case study. Retrieved 25 February, 2006 from www.erudit.org. Guba, E.G. (1990). The alternative paradigm dialog. In E.G. Guba (Ed.). The paradigm dialog. Sage Publications. Gutman, J. (1982). A means-end chain model based on consumer categorization processes. Journal of Marketing, (46) 60-72. Gyimóthy, S., & Mykletun, R.J. (2004). Play in adventure tourism. The case of Arctic Trekking. Annals of Tourism Research, 31, (4) 855-878. Hall, C. M. (1995). Introduction to tourism in Australia. Melbourne: Longman. Hall, C. M., & McArthur, S. (1998). Integrated heritage management: Principles and practice. London: The Stationary Office. Hannabuss, S. (1999). Postmodernism and the heritage experience. Library Management, 20, (5) 295-303. Harrè, R. (1981). The positivist-empiricist approach and its alternative. In P. Reason & J. Rowan (Eds.). Human inquiry. John Wiley and sons Ltd.

142

Havlena, W.J., & Holbrook, M.B. (1986). The varieties of consumption experience. Comparing the typologies of emotion in consumer behaviour. Journal of Consumer Research, 13, (December) 394-404. Hay, I. (2000). Qualitative research methods in human geography. Melbourne: Oxford University Press. Holbrook, M.B., Lehmann, D.R., & O'Shaughnessy, J. (1986). Using versus choosing: the relationship of the consumption experience to reasons for purchasing. European Journal of Marketing, 20, (8) 49-62. Holloway, J.C. (1981). The guided tour: A sociological approach. Annals of Tourism Research, 8, (3) 377-402. Hood, M.G. (1983). Staying away: why people choose not to visit museums. Museum News. Part 61, 50-57. Howard, P. (2000). Heritage challenges in the new century. International Journal of Heritage Studies, 6, (1) 7-8. Howard, P., & Pinder, D. (2003). Cultural heritage and sustainability in the coastal zone: experiences in south west England. Journal of Cultural Heritage, 4, (1) 57-68. Hyounggon, K. (2005). Research note: nostalgia and tourism. Tourism Analysis, 10, (1) 85-88. Janiskee, R. L. (1996). Historic houses and special events. Annals of Tourism Research, 23, (2) 398-414. Jayaratne, T.E., & Stewart, A. (1991). Quantitative and qualitative methods in socialscience: current issues and practical strategies. In M.M.Fonow and

143

Judith Cook (Eds.). Beyond methodology: feminist scholarship as lived research. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. Jennings, G. (2001). Tourism Research. Milton, Great Britain: Wiley Australia. Jewell, B., & Crofts, J.C. (2001). Adding psychological value to heritage tourism experiences. Journal of Travel and Tourism Marketing, 11, (4) 13-28. Johnson, P., & Thomas, B. (1990). Measuring local employment impact of tourist attractions. Regional Studies, 24, (5) 395-403. Johnson, P., & Thomas, B., (Eds.). (1992). Choice and demand in tourism. London: Mansell Publishing Limited. Kassarjian, H. (1977). Context analysis in consumer research. Journal of Consumer Research, 4, (1) 8-18. Kerstetter, D. L., Confer, J.J., & Graefe, A.R. (2001). An exploration of the specialization concept within the context of heritage tourism. Journal of Travel Research, 39, (3) 267-274. Kim, S.S., & Agrusa, J. (2005). The positioning of overseas honeymoon destinations. Annals of Tourism Research, 32, (4) 887-904. Küller, R. (1980). Architecture and emotions. In B. Mikellides (Ed.). Architecture for people. London: Macmillan Publishing Company. Kumar, R. (1996). Research methodology: a step by step guide for beginners. Australia: Sage Publications. Langer, E.J. (1993). Mindfulness. Reading: Addison-Wesley Publishing.

144

Lasanky, D. M. (2004). Introduction. In D.M. Lasanky & B. McLaren. (Eds.). Architecture and tourism. New York: Berg. Lau, A.L.S., & McKercher, B. (2004). Exploration versus acquisition: a comparison of first time and repeat visitors. Journal of Travel Research, (42) 279-285. Lavoie, C. (1998). The wall/ruin: Meaning and memory in landscape. Landscape Review, 4, (1) 27-38. Lepp, A., & Gibson, H. (2003). Tourist roles, perceived risk and international tourism. Annals of Tourism Research, 30, (3) 606-624. Li,Y. (2003). Heritage tourism: the contradictions between conservations and change. Tourism and Hospitality Research, 4, (3) 247-261. Lofgren, O. (2004). Narrating the tourist experience. In S.B. Gmelch (Ed.). Tourists and tourism: A reader. Illinois, USA: Waveland Press Inc. Mackay, K., & Fesenmaier, D. (1997). Pictorial element of destination in image formation. Annals of Tourism Research, 24, (3) 537-565. Majumbar, S. (2005). Preservation and conservation of literary heritage: a case study of Indian. The International Information & Library Review, 37, (3) 179-187. Malhorta, N., Hall, J., Shaw, M., & Oppenheim, P. (2002). Marketing research. Australia: Prentice Hall. Markwell, K. W. (1997). Dimensions of photography in a nature-based tour. Annals of Tourism Research, 24, (1) 131-155.

145

Marshall, C., & Rossman, G.B. (1995). Designing qualitative research (2nd ed). London: Sage Publications. Masberg, B.A., & Silverman, C.H. (1996). Visitor experiences at heritage sites: a phenomenological approach. Journal of Travel Research, 34, (4) 20-25. McCleod, W.T. (1988). Collins English Dictionary and Thesaurus. Glasgow: Harper Collins Publishers. McClintock, C., & Greene, J. (1985). Triangulation in practice. Evaluation and Program Planning, 8, (4) 351-357. McDonald, M. (2000). Tourism, heritage buildings and tax relief. Journal of Travel Research, 38, (3) 282-291. McGregor, R. (2003). Art Deco city: Napier, New Zealand. Napier, New Zealand: Art Deco Trust. McIntosh, A. J. (1997). The experiences and benefits gained by tourists visiting socioindustrial heritage attractions. Department of Hospitality and Tourism Management. Edinburgh, Queen Margaret College. McIntosh, A.J. (1998). Mixing methods: putting the tourist at the forefront of tourism research. Tourism Analysis, 3, (2) 121-127. McIntosh, A. J. (1999). Into the tourist's mind: understanding the value of the heritage experience. Journal of Travel and Tourism Marketing, 8, (1) 41-65. McIntosh, A. J., & Prentice, R.C. (1999). Affirming authenticity: Consuming cultural heritage. Annals of Tourism Research, 26, (3) 589-612.

146

McIntosh, A. J., & Siggs, A. (2005). An exploration of the experiential nature of boutique accommodation. Journal of Travel Research, (44) 74-81. McIntosh, A. J., & Thyne, M.A. (2005). Understanding tourist behaviour using means-end chain theory. Annals of Tourism Research, 32, (1), 259262. McKercher, B., & du Cros, H. (2002). The partnership between tourism and cultural heritage management. Binghamton, New York: Haworth. Meethan, K. (1996). Consuming (in) the civilized city. Annals of Tourism Research, 23, (2) 322-340. Miller, J., & Glassner, B. (2004). Interviews. In D. Silverman (Ed). Qualitative research: theory, method and practice. London: Sage Publications. Ministry of Agriculture and Fishing. (2003). Five regions backed to develop cultural tourism. Retrieved January 14, 2006 from www.maf.govt.nz. Ministry of Culture and Heritage (2004). How Important is Culture? New Zealander's views in 1997. Retrieved November 18, 2004 from www.cultureandheritage.govt.nz. Ministry of Tourism (2004). NZ's path towards a sustainable tourism industry, Retrieved 5 July, 2005 from www.tourism.govt.nz. Ministry of Tourism. (2001). New Zealand Tourism Strategy 2010. Retrieved 2 November, 2004 from www.tourism.govt.nz. Mitchell, A. (1983). The nine American lifestyles. New York: Warner.

147

Morgan, D., Moore, K., & Mansell, R. (2005). Adventure tourists on water: linking expectations, affect, achievement and enjoyment to the sports tourism adventure. Journal of Sports Tourism, 10, (1), 73-88. Moscardo, G. (1996). Mindful visitors, heritage and tourism. Annals of Tourism Research, 23, (2) 376-397. Munsters, W. (1996). The strategic development of heritage tourism: The Dutch approach. Managing Leisure, 1, (3) 139-151. Navrud, S., & Ready, R.C. (2002). Valuing cultural heritage: applying environmental valuation techniques to historic buildings, monuments and artifacts. Cheltenham, UK: MA Edward Elgar. New Zealand Historic Places Trust (2001). Hawke's Bay Registration Project 2004-2006. Retrieved 10 November, 2004 from www.historic.org. New Zealand Historic Places Trust (2005). Rarangi Taonga: The Register of historic places, historic areas, Wahi Tapu and Wahi Tapu Areas. Retrieved 10 November, 2004 from www.historic.org. Nicotera, S. (1995). Computer terms. Retrieved 24 February, 2006 from www.sivideo.com. Norberg-Schulz, C. (1969). Meaning in architecture. In C. Jenecks (Ed.). Meaning in Architecture. London: The Cresset Press. Noy, C. (2004). This trip really changed me. Backpackers' narratives of self-change. Annals of Tourism Research, 31, (1) 78-102. Nuryanti, W. (1996). Heritage and postmodern tourism. Annals of Tourism

148

Research, 23, (2) 249-260. O'Dell, T. (2005). Experiencescapes: Blurring borders and testing connections. In T. O'Dell & P. Billing (Eds.). Experiencescapes: Tourism, culture and economy. Vancouver, U.S.A: Copenhagen Business School Press. Oppermann, M. (2000). Triangulation - a methodological discussion. International Journal of Tourism Research, 2, (2) 141-145. Osborne, P. (2000). Traveling light: Photography, travel and visual culture. Manchester: Manchester University Press. Otto, J. E., & Richie, J.R.B. (1996). The service experience in tourism. Tourism Management, 17, (3) 165-174. Palmer, C. (1999). Tourism and the symbols of identity. Tourism Management 20, (3) 313-321. Palmer, C. (2004). An ethnography of Englishness. Annals of Tourism Research, 32, (1) 7-27. Patterson, D., & Bitgood, S. (1988). Some evolving principles of visitor behavior. In S. Bitgood, J.T. Roper Jr., & A. Benefield (eds.). Visitor Studies: theory, research and practice. Jacksonville: Center for Social Design. Patton, M.Q. (1980). Qualitative evaluation methods. Beverly Hills: Sage Publications. Pearce, D. (1988). The Ulysses Factor. New York: Springer Velag. Pearce, D.G. (1993). Comparative studies in tourism research. In D.G. Pearce and R.W.

149

Butler (Eds). Tourism Research: critiques and challenges. London, New York: Routledge. Pearce, M. (2003). Saving Time. A review of the conservation movement in Britain in the 20th Century. Retrieved December 18, 2005 from www.buildingconservation.com. Pearce, P.L. (1990). Farm tourism in New Zealand: a social situation analysis. Annals of Tourism Research, 17, (3) 337-352. Pine, J.B. & Gilmore, J.H. (1999). The experience economy: Work is theatre and every business a stage. Cleveland, United States of America. Poria, Y., Butler, R., & Airey, D. (2001a). Clarifying heritage tourism: a comment. Annals of Tourism Research, 28, (4) 1047-1049. Poria, Y., Butler, R., & Airey, D. (2004a). The meanings of heritage sites for tourists: the case of Massada. Tourism Analysis, 9, (1-2) 15-22. Poria, Y., Butler, R., & Airey, D. (2004b). Links between tourists, heritage, and reasons for visiting heritage sites. Journal of Travel Research, 43, (1) 19-28. Powe, N. A., & Willis, K.G. (1996). Benefits received by visitors to heritage sites: a case study of Warkworth Castle. Leisure Studies, 15, (4) 259275. Prentice, R. (1993). Tourism and heritage attractions. London: Routledge. Prentice, R.C., Witt, S.F., & Hamer, C. (1993). The experience of industrial heritage: the case of Black Gold. Built Environment, 19, (2) 137-146.

150

Prentice, R. C., Witt, S.F., & Hamer, C. (1998). Tourism as experience: the case of heritage parks. Annals of Tourism Research, 25, (1) 1-24. Prideaux, B., & Kininmont, C.J. (1999). Tourism and heritage are not strangers: A study of opportunities for rural heritage museums to maximise tourism visitation. Journal of Travel Research, (37) 299-303. Prince, H. (1961). The geographical imagination. Landscape, (11) 22-25. Prince, D.R. (1990). Factors influencing museum visits: an empirical evaluation of audience selection. Museum Management and Curatorship, (8) 157-162. Pritchard, M.P., & Havitz, M.E. (2005). Destination appraisal. An analysis of critical incidents. Annals of Tourism Research, 33, (1) 25-46. Relph, E. (1976). Place and placelessness. London: Pion Limited. Reynolds, T. J., & Gutman, J. (1988). Laddering theory, method, analysis and interpretation. Journal of Advertising Research, 28, (1) 13-32. Richards, G., & Wilson, J. (Article in Press). Developing creativity in tourist experiences. A solution to the serial reproduction of culture? Tourism Management. Riley, R., Baker, D., & Van Doren, C.S. (1998). Movie induced tourism. Annals of Tourism Research, 25, (4) 919-935. Rinschede, G. (1992). Forms of religious tourism. Annals of Tourism Research, 19, (1) 51-62. Robson, C. (2002). Real world research. Victoria, Australia, Blackwell:

151

Publishing Limited. Rokeach, M. (1968). Beliefs, attitudes and values. San Francisco: Jossey Bass. Rubenstein, J.M. (1989). The cultural landscape. Ohio: Merrill Publishing Company. Ryan, C. (2000). Tourist experiences, phenomenographic analysis, postpositivism and neural network software. International Journal of Tourism Research, 2, (2) 110-131. Salazar, S. D. S., & Marques, J.M. (2005). Valuing cultural heritage: the social benefits of restoring an old Arab tower. Journal of Cultural Heritage, 6, (1) 69-77. Sànchez, J., Callarisa, L., Rodríguez, R.M., & Moliner, M.A. (2006). Perceived value of the purchase of a tourism product. Tourism Management, 27, (3) 394-409. Schanzel, H.A., & McIntosh, A.J. (2000). An insight into the personal and emotive context of wildlife viewing at the Penguin Place, Otago. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 8, (1) 36-53. Scruton, R. (1979). The aesthetics of architecture. London: Methuen & Co. Ltd. Seng Ooi, C. (2005). Orientalist Tourist Images and their consequences: towards a critical analysis. Embodying tourism research: advancing critical approaches. Dubrovnik, Canada: University of Wales Institute. Sonmez, S., & Graefe, A. (1998). Determining future travel behaviour from past travel experience and perceptions of risk and safety. Journal of

152

Travel Research, 37, (4) 171-177. Sontag, S. (1977). On Photography. London: Penguin Books. Squire, S. J. (1994). The cultural values of literary tourism. Annals of Tourism Research, 21, (1) 103-120. Statistics New Zealand. (2005a). Hawke's Bay Region Community Profile. Retrieved January 10, 2006 from www.hawkesbay.co.nz. Statistics New Zealand (2005b). Introduction. Retrieved January 10, 2006 from www.hawkesbay.co.nz. Stern, B. (1992). Historical and personal nostalgia in advertising text: the Fin de Siecle effect. Journal of Advertising, 21, (4) 11-22. Stern, C.J., Lassoie, J.P., Lee, D.R., & Deshler, D.J. (2003). How eco is ecotourism? A comparative case study of ecotourism in Costa Rica. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 11, (4), 322-357. Surez, R., Sendra, J.J., Navarro, S.J., & Leon, A.L. (2005). The sound of the cathedral mosque of Córdoba. Journal of Cultural Heritage, 6, (4) 307-312. Swarbrooke, J. (1994). The future of the past: heritage tourism in the 21st century. In A.V. Seaton (Ed.). Tourism: the state of the art, p.222-229. Chichester: Wiley. Swarbrooke, J., & Horner, S. (1999). Consumer behaviour in tourism. Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann. Tannock, S. (1995). Nostalgia critique. Cultural Studies, 9, (3) 453-464.

153

Timothy, D. J. (1997). Tourism and the personal experience. Annals of Tourism Research, 24, (3) 751-754. Tourism New Zealand, (2003). Demand for cultural tourism, a Colmar Brunton Report. Retrieved November 3, 2004 from www.creativenz.govt.nz. Tourism New Zealand. ( Date Not given). Interactive Traveller = New Zealand's Target Market. Retrieved 3 November, 2004 from www.tourismnewzealand.com. Tourism Research Council New Zealand. (August, 2004). New Zealand regional tourism forecasts: 2004-2010: Hawke's Bay RTO. Retrieved 15 August, 2005 from www.trcnz.govt.nz. Tourism Research Council New Zealand. (2005). Hawke's Bay RTO. Retrieved 16 September, 2005, from www.trcnz.govt.nz. Tourism Research Council New Zealand. (2006). TRCNZ Home. Retrieved 6 May, 2006, from www.trcnz.govt.nz. Trapp-Fallon, J.M. (2003). Searching for rich narratives of tourism and leisure experiences: How oral history could provide an answer. Tourism and Hospitality Research, 4, (4) 297-306. Tuan, Y. (2004). Place, art and self. Iceland: Center for American Places. Turley, L.W., & Kelly, S.W. (1997). A comparison of advertising content: nsinessto business versus customer services. Journal of Advertising, 26, (4), 39-48. Turley, S.K. (2001). Children and the demand for recreational experiences: the case of zoos. Leisure Studies, 20, (1) 73-88.

154

Uriely, N. (2005). The tourist experience: conceptual development. Annals of Tourism Research, 32, (1) 199-216. Urry, J. (1990). The tourist gaze. London: Sage Publications. Urry, J. (2002). The tourist gaze. London: Sage. Verbeke, M. J., & Rekon, J.V. (1996). Scanning museum visitors: Urban tourism marketing. Annals of Tourism Research, 23, (2) 364-375. Waitt, G. (2000). Consuming heritage: perceived historical authenticity. Annals of Tourism Research, 27, (4) 835-862. Walle, A. H. (1997). Quantitative versus qualitative tourism research. Annals of Tourism Research, 24, (3) 524-536. Wheelan, S., & Abraham, M. (1993). The concept of intergroup mirroring: reality or illusion? Human Relations, 46, (7) 803-825. Wilkinson, S. (2004). Focus group research. In D. Silverman (Ed). Qualitative research: theory, method and practice. London: Sage Publications. Willis, D. (1999). The emerald city and other essays on the architectural imagination. New York: Princeton Architectural Press. Wilson, J. (2002). An holistic approach to tourist place image and spatial behaviour. In Richards, G., & Wilson, J. (Article in Press). Developing creativity in tourist experiences. A solution to the serial reproduction of culture? Tourism Management. Wright, P. (1985). On living in an old country. London: Verso.

155

Yale, P. (1991). From tourist attractions to heritage tourism. Elm Publications: Huntingdon. Yoon, Y., Gursoy, D., & Chen, J.S. (2001). Validating a tourism development theory with structual equation modeling. Tourism Management, 22, (4) 363-372. Youngman, M.B. (1979). Analysing social and educational research data. London: McGraw-Hill Book Company. Zeppel, H., & Hall, C. (1991). Selling art and history: Cultural heritage and tourism. Tourism Studies, (2) 47-55.

156

Appendices. Appendix A ­ Questions used in Preliminary Semi-Structured Interviews Questions for preliminary in-depth interviews Good morning/afternoon, my name is Greg Willson and I am conducting research supported by The Ministry of Tourism and University of Waikato looking into the value tourists place on historic places. I was wondering if you could spare a small amount of time to assist me? General Information Are you visiting Hawkes Bay from overseas?(if so what is your country of origin?) (filter question) How long have you been in the Hawkes Bay region? Have you been involved in any activities looking at historic places? (if so which ones) Have any of these been paid activities? (if so which ones?) Would you be willing to pay more for some of these activities? (if so which ones, how much more) How long have you stayed in Hawkes Bay? (in what towns?) Main questions What interests you about historic places? (why does that interest you?) What places in particular were you most interested in (why is that?)

157

How much prior knowledge did you have about the historic places in Hawkes Bay? How significantly did the existence of historic buildings in the region influence your tourism experience? (in what ways did it add to or detract from your overall satisfaction with the area?) What motivated you to visit the historic places you did? Can you please explain to me the nature of the experience you had while visiting those historic places (what feelings were invoked during this experience)

What to you are the most important attributes of historic places in terms of creating a successful tourism experience?

Why do you feel it is important for historic places to have these attributes? How do you feel the historic places in Hawkes Bay add to its appeal as a tourist destination? Do you feel the residents of Hawkes Bay benefit by having these historic places in their region? (If so, how?) Did viewing the historic places add to your knowledge or appreciation of New Zealand in any way? (in which ways, why is this important to you?) How do you feel about some of the historic places being changed from how they originally were in order to be used for different purposes today? (why do you feel this way?) What personal benefits did you receive through visiting the historic places you did? (why is that important to you?) 158

Demographic information. The following demographic questions will assist me with creating general profiles of the visitors that I am interviewing. No information collected will be used for anything unrelated to this research. What is your age? (<20) (21-30) (31-39) (41-49) (50-59) (60-69) 70+ What is your occupation? What is the size of the group you are travelling with? (1-2) (3-4) (5-6) (7+) What is your main reason for visiting Hawkes Bay? What type of accommodation are you mainly using while in Hawkes Bay?

159

Appendix B ­ Questionnaire Used in this Research.

Your Holiday Experiences in Hawke's Bay
Thank you for your support in completing this questionnaire. I am conducting New Zealand Ministry of Tourism supported research for my Masters Degree in Tourism and Hospitality Management at The University of Waikato. I am studying international tourists' experiences of the region. All information you provide in this questionnaire is confidential and you will not be identified in any way. Many thanks once again, I hope you are having an enjoyable stay in New Zealand. Greg Willson Postgraduate Researcher, University of Waikato.

S i on A Y V si t t o H keÕs B ect : our i aw ay
H keÕs B i s l ocat ed on t he E aw ay ast C oast of N Zeal andÕs N t h I sl and. I t i ncl udes t he m or ew or aj ci t i es of N er and H i ngs. The r egi on st r et ches f r om W paw i n S her n H keÕs B t o api ast ai a out aw ay W r oa and M a P ai ahi enni nsul a i n t he N t h. or
1) Have you visited Hawke's Bay before? Yes No

2) How much prior knowledge did you have about the types of attractions Hawke's Bay offers? A lot of knowledge Some knowledge No knowledge

3) Which of the following have you visited/participated in so far? (Please tick as many as applicable) Shopping Fishing Cinema Arts and Crafts Vineyards Heritage Trail Beach Heritage Buildings

Specific Attraction(s) (please state) Other (please state)

.................................................................. ..................................................................

4) What initially attracted you to the region? (Please tick the most prominent of the following items): Climate Fishing Seemed peaceful Shopping Arts and Crafts Vineyards Atmosphere Beach Just Passing Through Heritage Buildings

160

Specific Attraction(s)(please state) Other (please state)

.................................................................. .......................................................................

What have been your favourite attractions to visit in Hawke's Bay so far? .............................................................................................................................. ......................................................................................................

S i on B H i t age B l di ngs ect : er ui
H i t age bui l di ngs ar e t hose t hat peopl e r egar d as bei ng m ngf ul t o a count r yÕs er eani hi st or y. H keÕs B has a num of A t D aw ay ber r eco and S pani sh M ssi on st yl e bui l di ngs t hat i can be cl assi f i ed as her i t age bui l di ngs. Ther e ar e al so m ot her her i t age bui l di ngs i n any t he r egi on t hat w e used f or ear l y com er ci al use. These i ncl ude ear l y f ar m ng, t obacco er m i and f i shi ng bui l di ngs. Ther e i s al so a pr esence of V ct or i an bui l di ngs i n H keÕs B . i aw ay
1) How interested are you in heritage buildings in general? Very interested Somewhat disinterested Somewhat interested Very disinterested Neither interested nor disinterested

2) How interested are you in the heritage buildings of the Hawke's Bay? Very interested Somewhat disinterested Somewhat interested Very disinterested Neither interested nor disinterested

3) How much of an influence did the presence of heritage buildings in the region have on bringing you to the region? Very strong influence Weak influence Strong influence No influence Moderate influence

4) Have you participated in any events associated with heritage buildings? (If so please tick as many as applicable) ­ Guided tour Self guided drive Yes No Self-guided walk Building interior tour Stayed in historic accommodation Eaten in a historic restaurant

161

Special Event(s)(please name) Other (please name)

................................................................... ...........................................................................

5) Would you like to see any new activities related to heritage buildings in the region created? (If so, No please explain) Yes .............................................................................................................................. .............................................................................................................................. .............................................................................................................................. .............................................................................. 6) Please indicate by circling the appropriate number below, the extent to which you agree or disagree with the following statements:
Strongly Agree Agree or Disagree Strongly Disagree Disagree

a) Heritage buildings have to be very old to be interesting b) It saddens me when heritage buildings are modernised c) All heritage buildings should be preserved d) It would not matter if some of the heritage buildings in this region are lost e) I prefer to choose accommodation in heritage buildings f) I prefer to eat at restaurants based in heritage buildings g) I prefer to shop in stores operating in heritage buildings

1 1 1 1 1 1 1

2 2 2 2 2 2 2

3 3 3 3 3 3 3

4 4 4 4 4 4 4

5 5 5 5 5 5 5

h) It is the responsibility of everyone to ensure heritage buildings are preserved i) Heritage buildings must not be altered from their original state j) I would be willing to pay some money to ensure heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay are preserved for future generations k) The collection of heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay cannot be found in any other country in the world l) The heritage buildings in the Hawke's Bay have added to my experience of the region

1 1

2 2

3 3

4 4

5 5

1 1 1

2 2 2

3 3 3

4 4 4

5 5 5

162

7) When thinking about heritage buildings in general, what in particular interests you about them?
Very
Neither interested Very Interested Interested or disinterested Disinterested Disinterested

a) The architecture b) How old they are

1 1

2 2

3 3

4 4

5 5

c) The history associated with them d) The stories behind them e) The interiors of the buildings f) The colours of the buildings g) Art Deco Buildings h) Spanish Mission Buildings i) Commercial Heritage Buildings j) Victorian Heritage Buildings k) The exteriors of the buildings l) The desire to see something different m)They may help me learn something new about the region n) They may help me learn something new about the country o) To see for what purpose they are now being used

1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2

3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3

4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4

5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5

p) What 3 words would you use to describe the heritage buildings of Hawke's Bay? ............................................................................................................... 8) Thinking about the influence of heritage buildings on your holiday experience in Hawke's Bay please indicate by circling the appropriate number below, the extent to which you agree or disagree with each of the following statements: The heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay....
a) Helped me learn more about the region's history b) Helped me learn more about New Zealand's history c) Helped me learn more about New Zealand's culture d) Are a highlight of my visit in New Zealand
Strongly Agree Agree Neither Agree Strongly or Disagree Disagree Disagree

1 1 1 1

2 2 2 2

3 3 3 3

4 4 4 4

5 5 5 5

163

e) Were a major reason why I came to Hawke's Bay

1

2

3

4

5

f) Increased my satisfaction with Hawke's Bay g) Give me a unique experience I can't get in my own country

1 1

2 2

3 3

4 4

5 5

h) Give me a unique experience I can't get elsewhere in New Zealand i) Allowed me to reflect on my past

1 1

2 2

3 3

4 4

5 5

j)

Allow me to reflect on a time when the world wasn't so complicated

1 1 1 1

2 2 2 2

3 3 3 3

4 4 4 4

5 5 5 5

k) Are pleasant to look at l) Contain a number of interesting stories within them

m) Have a good number of activities associated with them

n) Have activities associated with them which are of good value for money o) Create a unique townscape p) Aren't old enough

1 1 1 1

2 2 2 2

3 3 3 3

4 4 4 4

5 5 5 5

q) Are not as interesting as heritage buildings
elsewhere in the world

S ec ti o n C : V a lu in g Hawk e's Bay 's Her i t ag e B ui ld in g s .
Imagine that you had already booked accommodation to stay in Hawke's Bay for a holiday, but found that all the heritage buildings in the region were due to be completely modernised 1) Would you be willing to pay any money to ensure the heritage buildings in Hawke's Bay are preserved for your holiday? 164

Yes

No

2) Would you personally be willing to pay an extra $NZ ............... on your cost of accommodation to ensure that all currently listed heritage buildings are preserved for you to enjoy during future holidays? Yes No

For example, you currently spend $100 per night on accommodation in Hawke's Bay. Would you be willing to spend $............... per night to ensure that heritage buildings in the region were preserved?

S i on D A ect : bout Y sel f our
1) What is your country of origin? (please state)........................................................ 2) How many nights have you been in the Hawke's Bay region so far?...............nights 3) How long do you plan to stay in the Hawke's Bay region in total?............... total nights 4) How many nights in total are you staying in New Zealand?............ nights. 5) Please indicate your gender. Male 6) Please indicate your age (in years). 16-19 30-34 45-49 60-64 75-79 20-24 35-39 50-54 65-69 80+ 25-29 40-44 55-59 70-74 Female

7) How are you traveling through New Zealand? (Please tick one only) A packaged tour (all transport and accommodation arranged) A semi packaged tour (only part of the above) Free and independently Other (please specify) ............................. 8) Who are you traveling through Hawke's Bay with? (Tick all that apply) Alone With my partner/spouse

165

With family Organised group/tour

With a friend(s) With children (please state number) ....................

9) What is the size of the group you are traveling with including yourself? 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10+

10) What is your primary form of accommodation while staying in Hawke's Bay? Hotel Backpackers/youth hostel Motel With friends/family Campervan/camping Other

11) What is your highest educational qualification? Up to three years secondary or high school Partially completed tertiary qualification Post graduate qualification Other (please state) Secondary or high school education Tertiary qualification Trade certificate ...............................................................

12) Do you belong to any group associated in any ways with cultural or heritage issues? Yes (please name) .............................................................. No

13) What is your occupation? (please state job title and industry. If retired please state your former occupation)............................................................................................................. ........................................................................................................................... ......................................................................................................... If you would like to enter the draw to win a Hawke's Bay souvenir package valued at over $100, please fill in your contact details below
Name......................................................................................................... Address...................................................................................................... ................................................................................................................. Phone......................................................................................................... Email.........................................................................................................

Thank you. Enjoy the rest of your stay in New Zealand! Greg Willson
166

Appendix C: Photographs Used in Research.

167

168

169

170

171

172

Appendix D - Questions Used for Photograph-Supported Interviews How long have you been in Hawke's Bay?

What things have you done and seen while in Hawke's Bay? Discussion of selected photographs Could I please get you to pick any photographs that you feel most represent your experiences of Hawke's Bay? What are your reasons for picking these photos? Have you got any stories or experiences you can share with me about any of the items contained in the photos you've chosen?

173

Hawke's Bay in general ­ visitor choice of photos If you went out now to take some photos of Hawke's Bay, what would they be of ­ why is that? Do you feel you've received a different set of experiences from Hawke's Bay than other parts of NZ? (why is that?) Heritage buildings focus I've noted you've picked (0, 1, 2 ­ whichever it may be) photos of heritage buildings in ­ what are the reasons for including this many/ not including any? What in particular interests you about the heritage buildings? Are there any particular buildings that have stood out from others? What have these buildings added to your experience of the region? (why is that important to you? Have you got any stories/experiences you can share with me about the buildings in particular? Would you like to see any new activities created involving heritage buildings? If you had to describe Hawke's Bay to your friends and family how would you do that?

174

Appendix E: Copy of University of Waikato Human Ethics Committee Application and Information Sheet for Participants.

Application for Ethical Approval Outline of Research Project

1. Title of Project:

175

Assessing the Value of Historic Places to Tourists in the Hawkes Bay Region of New Zealand. 2. Researcher(s) name and contact information: Greg Willson 021 170 2051, or email gbw2@waikato.ac.nz

3. Supervisor's name and contact information: Alison McIntosh Phone: extension 4962 or email mcintosh@waikato.ac.nz 4. Brief Outline of the Project (what is it about and what is being investigated): The aim of this research is to determine the value international tourists place on historic places in Hawkes Bay. Value consists of all perceived attributes and qualities of historic places that in the eyes of tourists enhances their tourism experience. Results will assist New Zealand and its regions to differentiate themselves by their historic product in the eyes of tourists

5. Methodology: Willing participants will be randomly selected and engaged with myself in qualitative indepth conversational style interviews. These interviews will employ the widely used laddering technique which involves follow up questions to encourage respondents to think on a more personal value-based level and in terms of what they value by asking them `why was that important to you' (McIntosh and Prentice, 1999). A preliminary interview guide is attached. Findings from these preliminary interviews will help to create a future questionnaire [i.e. determine value dimensions that can be incorporated into a structured questionnaire and tested on a representative sample]. The sample size will be terminated at the point of redundancy; that is where no more information is forthcoming. Questions have been developed through analysis of a number of relevant academic books and journal articles focusing on heritage tourism and understanding the visitor to heritage sites. Separate ethics approval will be sought for the second phase.

176

6. Expected Outcomes of the Research: There are likely to be a number of outcomes of this research. This research will form my thesis required for my Masters of Management Studies and throughout the year I am likely to be presenting data at a number of appropriate events, such as The National Heritage Conference during October in Napier. This research is a Ministry of Tourism supported scholarship project and as such, major outcomes of the research will be communicating the findings to relevant groups in the tourism industry. It is also likely that an executive summary for industry end-users will be constructed near the end of completion. 7. How will the participants be selected and how many will be involved? I will be situated at a place of high tourist flow, probably on Marine Parade near the visitor information center in Napier. If this area is inappropriate, further areas of high tourist flow will be used to interview visitors, providing they are comfortable and safe areas. Two filter questions will be used to determine whether the tourists are international, and whether they have been in the area for a significant amount of time. Sampling will be terminated when no information is forthcoming. 8. How will the participants be contacted? I will simply ask for voluntary verbal participation from international tourists that are in Napier during the time of fieldwork. 9. Explain incentives and/or compulsion for participants to be involved in this study. While there is no financial incentive for participants to be involved in this study, participants if interested will be given the chance to request an executive summary of this research that they have been involved in. I will clearly state that this is a voluntary project, explain the objectives of the research and show interested visitors a letter of Ministry of Tourism support. 10. How will your processes allow participants to: a) refuse to answer any particular question, and withdraw from the study at any time

177

b) ask any further questions about the study, which occur during participation c) be given access to a summary of the findings from the study when it is concluded a) I will explain to participants before any questions are asked that they are free to withdraw from the study at any time or refuse to answer any question. b) At the conclusion of the interview I will thank participants and offer them a form, which will include my contact details, and information explaining that at any time they do not wish their information to be included in my report, they can request that it be withdrawn at any time. Participants will also be informed on these forms that they can request information from me. I would be open to discuss the details of my research with any participant that wished to know further details. c) The information sheet I will offer will state that participants can request access to modified findings of the research when they become available. 11. Explain how any publications and/or reports will have the consent of participants, and how the anonymity of participants will be protected. Participants will be told that the information that will be collected is going to be used for postgraduate study for The University of Waikato and supported by The Ministry of Tourism. This will be repeated again on the information sheet, along with information that participants can withdraw consent at any time. No identifiable information will be asked, such as names and phone numbers, and care will be taken when labeling tapes for instance, to use labeling that is completely anonymous. Notes and tapes will always be stored in a locked area when not in my sight. 12. What will happen to the information collected from participants? The information will be viewed only by myself, Alison McIntosh and other staff from the tourism department at The University of Waikato. Information will be stored on tapes, personal computers and transcripts which will be kept completely anonymous. All

178

information will be kept by myself or Alison McIntosh until a reasonable time when it will be destroyed through shredding and deleting of tape recordings. 13. Anticipated date to begin data collection. Thursday, 17 February 2005. Thank you very much for assisting my research, which aims to assess the value of historic places to tourists in the Hawkes Bay Region of New Zealand. This research is supported by the Ministry of Tourism and is to be completed for the requirements of my Masters of Tourism Management at The University of Waikato. All information that you have provided me will only be used for this research, and your anonymity will be ensured at all times. If at any stage you would like further information on my research, or wish to withdraw your comments, please don't hesitate to contact me. If you would like an executive summary of the findings from this research please contact me and I would be happy to provide them for you when available Thank you once again. Enjoy the rest of your stay in New Zealand! Greg Willson Postgraduate Researcher Phone: 021 170 2051 Email: gbw2@waikato.ac.nz

179

180

